Skip to main content
web
texts
movies
audio
software
image
logosearch

Search
upload
personSIGN IN
ABOUT
 
CONTACT
 
BLOG
 
PROJECTS
 
HELP
 
DONATE
 
JOBS
 
VOLUNTEER
 
PEOPLE
Full text of "Paradise lost"
See other formats
 STUDIA IN 



THE LIBRARY 

of 
VICTORIA UNIVERSITY 

Toronto 



PARADISE LOST 



CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS 

SLoniron: FETTER LANE, E.G. 

C. F. CLAY, MANAGER 




loo, PRINCES STREET 
Berlin: A. ASHER AND CO. 
Heipjtg: F. A. BROCKHAUS 
$efo lorfc: G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS 
an* Calcutta: MACMILLAN AND Co., LTD. 



Att Rights reserved 



MILTON 

PARADISE LOST 



Edited by 
A. W. VERITY, M.A. 

Sometime Scholar of Trinity College 






Cambridge : 
at the University Press 
1910 



PF 



5 
 



Cambrtogt: 

PRINTED BY JOHN CLAY, M.A. 
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS. 



PREFACE 

edition of Paradise Lost s> based on the smaller 
1 editions edited by me for the Pitt Press Series and 
issued between the years 1892 and 1896. All the editorial 
matter has been set up afresh and much of it recast ; and 
a considerable amount of fresh material has been added. 

I desire to repeat with emphasis the acknowledgment 
made in my earlier editions of my great indebtedness to 
previous editors. It is a pious pleasure to make special 
mention of the immortal labours of Todd and Masson ; nor 
should Newton and Keightley be forgotten. An editor is 
powerless to estimate what he owes to them (above all, to 
Masson), and to others who have wrestled with the 
allusions of a poem that for its full elucidation would ex- 
haust the last resources of scholarship. Some specific items, 
however, of my own obligations may be recorded here, 
while many instances are indicated in the course of the 

The text is founded on that of Masson's "Globe" 
edition, but with a simpler system of punctuation, such 
as I thought might be in rather closer conformity with the 

original. 

Nearly all the biblical and classical references given in 
this volume have been pointed out by, and taken from, 
other editors. 



vi PREFACE. 

A large proportion of the Milton references had their 
origin in the Concordance to Milton's poems by the 
American student Cleveland, a work of immense labour 
and great accuracy which has never, I think, received its 
due. I may mention in passing that, to prevent miscon- 
ception, I avoided consulting at all the Milton Lexicon 
published recently by another American student. On the 
other hand, I have used with much profit the scholarly and 
exhaustive dictionary of The Classical Mythology of Milton's 
English Poems, by Mr C. G. Osgood, one of those fine 
studies in English literature for which we have to thank the 
University of Yale. 

The extracts from the Milton MSS. are quoted (without, 
of course, any modernisation) from the beautiful facsimile 
published by the University Press, under the editorship of 
the Vice-Master of Trinity College. The textual variations 
are shown so simply by the editor's very ingenious typo- 
graphical arrangement that the work of collating is practically 
done away. 

The extracts from Milton's prose works are taken from 
the edition published in "Bonn's Standard Library." Apart 
from my general indebtedness to this edition, I must note 
that its footnotes are the source of many of my references to 
Milton's Christian Doctrine. 

All the translations of passages from Dante, and most of 
the Dante information, come from the editions of the 
"Temple" series. Except in a few specified cases, the 
passages are such as had struck me. 

The etymological material of the Glossary, together with 
a great deal of other miscellaneous information throughout 
the volume, is summarised from standard works of reference. 
Unfortunately, in attempting to edit a vast work like 
Paradise Lost, one has to "get up" all sorts of subjects 



PREFACE. v " 

outside the scope of one's own circumscribed interests, and 
this rather involves the affectation of knowledge. 

I owe not a little to the suggestions and criticisms of 
many unknown correspondents; and in going through 
examination-answers I have sometimes come across things 
that I was very glad to make a note of which is not 
surprising, now that English is taught so well in many 
schools. I recollect that the note on n. 497~ 5 02 came in 
a schoolboy's answer. 

The Indexes, apart from some expansion of the second, 
were compiled for me at the University Press; and it is a 
very great satisfaction to express my gratitude to the reader, 
or readers, of the Press whose vigilance over the proof- 
sheets has -saved me from many slips. 

I hope now that I have made adequate acknowledgment 
of my obligations; and perhaps it will not be undue egotism 
to add that in the course of twenty years of editing one 
necessarily accumulates a good deal of material and mis- 
cellanea. 



A. W. VERITY. 



BOSCOMBE, 

November 16, 1909. 



CONTENTS 

PAGES 

INTRODUCTION xi Ixxii 

PARADISE LOST 1362 

NOTES 363658 

APPENDIX . 659692 

GLOSSARY 693724 

INDEXES 725750 



P. L. 



INTRODUCTION 



LIFE OF MILTON. 

MILTON'S life falls into three clearly defined divisions. The 
first period ends with the poet's return from Italy in 1639; the 
second at the Restoration in 1660, when release from the fetters 
of politics enabled him to remind the world that he was a great 
poet ; the third is brought to a close with his death in 1674. 
Paradise Lost belongs to the last of these periods ; but we 
propose to summarise briefly the main events of all three. 

John Milton was born on December 9, 1608, in London. He 
came, in his own words, ex genere honesto. A family of Miltons 
had been settled in Oxfordshire since the reign of Elizabeth. 
The poet's father had been educated at an Oxford school, possibly 
as a chorister in one of the College choir-schools, and imbibing 
Anglican sympathies had conformed to the Established Church. 
For this he was disinherited by his Roman Catholic father. He 
settled in London, following the profession of scrivener. A 
scrivener combined the occupations of lawyer and law-stationer. 
It appears to have been a lucrative calling ; certainly John Milton 
(the poet was named after the father) attained to easy circum- 
stances. He married about 1600, and had six children, of 
whom several died young. The third child was the poet. 

The elder Milton was evidently a man of considerable 
culture, in particular an accomplished musician, and a com- 
poser whose madrigals were deemed worthy of being printed 
side by side with those of Byrd, Orlando Gibbons and other 
leading musicians of the time. To him, no doubt, the poet 
owed the love of music of which we see frequent indications in 



Xli INTRODUCTION. 

the poems 1 . Realising, too, that in his son lay the promise 
and possibility of future greatness, John Milton took the utmost 
pains to have the boy adequately educated ; and the lines Ad 
Patrem show that the ties of affection between father and child 
were of more than ordinary closeness. 

Milton was sent to St Paul's School about the year 1620. 
Here two influences, apart from those of ordinary school-life, may 
have affected him particularly. The headmaster was a good 
English scholar ; he published a grammar containing many 
extracts from English poets, notably Spenser ; it is reasonable 
to assume that he had not a little to do with the encouragement 
and guidance of Milton's early taste for English poetry 2 . Also, 
the founder of St Paul's School, Colet, had prescribed as part 
of the school-course the study of certain early Christian writers, 
whose influence is said to be directly traceable in Milton's poems 
and may in some cases have suggested his choice of sacred 
themes 2 . While at St Paul's, Milton also had a tutor at home, 
Thomas Young, a Scotchman, afterwards an eminent Puritan 
divine the inspirer, doubtless, of much of his pupil's Puritan 
sympathies. And Milton enjoyed the signal advantage of 
growing up in the stimulating atmosphere of cultured home-life. 
Most men do not realise that the word 'culture' signifies 
anything very definite or desirable before they pass to the 
University; for Milton, however, home-life meant, from the 
first, not only broad interests and refinement, but active 
encouragement towards literature and study. In 1625 he left 
St Paul's. Of his extant English poems 3 only one, On the 

1 Milton was very fond of the organ; see  Penseroso, 161, note. 
During his residence at Horton Milton made occasional journeys to 
London to hear, and obtain instruction (probably from Henry Lawes) 
in, music. It was an age of great musical development. See "Milton's 
Knowledge of Music" by Mr W. H. Hadow, in Milton Memorial 
Ledtirts (1908). 

2 See the paper "Milton as Schoolboy and Schoolmaster" by 
Mr A. F. Leach, read before the British Academy, Dec. 10, 1908. 

3 His paraphrases of Psalms cxiv. cxxxvi. scarcely come under this 
heading. Aubrey says in his quaint Life of Milton: "Anno Domini 
1619 he was ten yeares old, as by his picture [the portrait by Cornelius 
Jansen] : and was then a poet." 



LIFE OF MILTON. Xlll 

Death of a Fair Infant, dates from his school-days ; but we are 
told that he had written much verse, English and Latin. And 
his early training had done that which was all-important : it had 
laid the foundation of the far-ranging knowledge which makes 
Paradise Lost unique for diversity of suggestion and interest. 

Milton went to Christ's College, Cambridge, in the Easter 
term of 1625, took his B.A. degree in 1629, proceeded M.A. in 
1632, and in the latter year left Cambridge. The popular view 
of Milton's connection with the University will be coloured for 
all time by Johnson's unfortunate story that for some unknown ' 
offence he " suffered the public indignity of corporal correction." 
For various reasons this story is now discredited by the best 
judges. It is certain, however, that early in 1626 Milton did have 
some serious difficulty with his tutor, which led to his removal 
from Cambridge for a few weeks and his transference to another 
tutor on his return later in the term. He spoke of the incident 
bitterly at the time in one of his Latin poems, and he spoke of 
Cambridge bitterly in after years. On the other hand he 
voluntarily passed seven years at the University, and resented 
strongly the imputations brought against him in the " Smectym- 
nuus" controversy that he had been in ill-favour with the 
authorities s ^^4iis_j:ollege. Writing in 1642, he takes the 
opportunity "to acknowledge publicly with all grateful mind, 
that more than ordinary favour and respect, which I found above 
any of my equals at the hands of those courteous and learned 
men, the fellows of that college wherein I spent some years : who 
at my parting, after I had taken two degrees, as the manner is, 
signified many ways how much better it would content them 
that I would stay ; as by many letters full of kindness and loving 
respect, both before that time, and long after, I was assured of 
their singular good affection towards me 1 ." And if we look into 
those uncomplimentary allusions to Cambridge which date from 
the controversial period of his life we see that the feeling they 

1 An Apology for Smectymmms, P. W. III. in. Perhaps Cambridge 
would have been more congenial to Milton had he been sent to Emmanuel 
College, long a centre of Puritanism. Dr John Preston, then Master 
of the college, was a noted leader of the Puritan party. 



xiv INTRODUCTION. 

represent is hardly more than a phase of his theological bias. 
He detested ecclesiasticism, and for him the two Universities 
(there is a fine impartiality in his diatribes) are the strongholds 
of what he detested : " nurseries of superstition " " not yet well 
recovered from the scholastic grossness of barbarous ages" 
given up to "monkish and miserable sophistry," and unpro- 
gressive in their educational methods. But it may fairly be 
assumed that Milton the scholar and poet, who chose to spend 
seven years at Cambridge, owed to her more than Milton the 
fierce controversialist admitted or knew. A poet he had proved 
himself before leaving the University in 1632. The short but 
exquisite ode At a Solemn Music^ and the Nativity Hymn 
(1629), were already written. 

Milton's father had settled at Horton in Buckinghamshire. 
Thither the son retired in July, 1632. He had gone to Cambridge 
with the intention of qualifying for some profession, perhaps the 
Church 1 : This purpose was soon given up, and when Milton 
returned to his father's house he seems to have made up his 
mind that there was no profession which he cared to enter. He 
would choose the better part of studying and preparing himseli, 
by rigorous self-discipline and application, for the far-off divine 
event to which his whole life moved. 

It was Milton's constant resolve to achieve something that 
should vindicate the ways of God to men, something great that 
should justify his own possession of unique powers powers of 
which, with no trace of egotism, he proclaims himself proudly 
conscious. The feeling finds repeated expression in his prose ; 
it is the guiding-star that shines clear and steadfast even through 
the mists of politics. He has a mission to fulfil, a purpose 
to accomplish, no less than the most fanatic of religious en- 
thusiasts ; and the means whereby this end is to be attained are 

1 Cf. Milton's own words : " the church, to whose service, by the 
intentions of my parents and friends, I was destined of a child, and 
in my own resolutions" (The Reason of Church Government, P. W. 
II. 482). What kept him from taking orders was primarily his 
objection to Church discipline and government : he spoke of himself 
as " Church-outed by the prelates." 



LIFE OF MILTON. XV 

devotion to religion, devotion to learning, and ascetic purity 

of life. 

This period of self-centred isolation lasted from 1632 to 1638. 
Gibbon tells us among the many wise things contained in that 
most wise book the Autobiography, that every man has two 
educations : that which he receives from his teachers and that 
which he owes to himself ; the latter being infinitely the more 
important. During these five years Milton completed his 
second education ; ranging the whole world of classical 1 anti- 
quity and absorbing the classical genius so thoroughly that 
the ancients were to him what they afterwards became to 
Landor, what they have never become to any other English 
poet in the same degree, even as the very breath of his being ; 
pursuing, too, other interests, such as music, astronomy 2 and 
the study of Italian literature; and combining these vast 
and diverse influences into a splendid equipment of hard-won, 
well-ordered culture. The world has known many greater 
scholars in the technical, limited sense than Milton, but few 
men, if any, who have mastered more things worth mastering 
in art, letters and scholarship 3 . It says much for the poet that 

1 He was closely familiar too with post-classical writers like Philo 
and the neo-Platonists ; nor must we forget the mediaeval element in 
his learning, due often to Rabbinical teaching. 

2 Science " natural philosophy," as he terms it is one of the 
branches of study advocated in his treatise On Education. Of his 
early interest in astronomy there is a reminiscence in Paradise Lost, 
II. 70811; where "Milton is not referring to an imaginary comet, 
but to one which actually did appear when he was a boy of 10 (1618), 
in the constellation called Ophiuchus. It was of enormous size, the 
tail being recorded as longer even than that of 1858. It was held 
responsible by educated and learned men of the day for disasters. 
Evelyn says in his diary, 'The effects of that comet, 1618, still working 
in the prodigious revolutions now beginning in Europe, especially in 
Germany'" (Professor Ray Lankester). 

3 Milton's poems with their undercurrent of perpetual allusion are 
the best proof of the width of his reading ; but interesting supplementary 
evidence is afforded by the Common-place Book discovered in 1874, and 
printed by the Camden Society, 1876. It contains extracts from about 
80 different authors whose works Milton had studied. The entries seem 
to have been made in the period 163746. 



XVI INTRODUCTION. 

he was sustained through this period of study, pursued ohne 
Hast, ohne Rast, by the full consciousness that all would be 
crowned by a masterpiece which should add one more testi- 
mony to the belief in that God who ordains the fates of men. 
It says also a very great deal for the father who suffered his 
son to follow in this manner the path of learning. 

True, Milton gave more than one earnest of his future fame. 
The dates of the early pieces D Allegro, II Penseroso, Arcades, 
Counts and Lycidas are not all certain ; but probably each was 
composed at Horton before 1638. Four of them have great 
autobiographic value as an indirect commentary, written from 
Milton's coign of seclusion, upon the moral crisis through which 
English life and thought were passing, the clash between the 
careless hedonism of the Cavalier world and the deepening 
austerity of Puritanism. In LlAllegro the poet holds the 
balance almost equal between the two opposing tendencies. In 
 Penseroso it becomes clear to which side his sympathies are 
leaning. Comus is a covert prophecy of the downfall of the 
Court-party, while Lycidas openly "foretells the mine" of the 
Established Church. The latter poem is the final utterance of 
Milton's lyric genius. Here he reaches, in Mr Mark Pattison's 
words, the high-water mark of English verse ; and then the 
pity of it he resigns that place among the lyrici vates of which 
the Roman singer was ambitious, and for nearly twenty years 
suffers his lyre to hang mute and rusty in the temple of the 
Muses. 

The composition of Lycidas may be assigned to the year 
1637. In the spring of the next year Milton started for Italy. 
It was natural that he should seek inspiration in the land where 
many English poets, from Chaucer to Shelley, have found it. 
Milton remained abroad some fifteen months. Originally he 
had intended to include Sicily and Greece in his travels, but 
news of the troubles in England hastened his return. He was 
brought face to face with the question whether or not he should 
bear his part in the coming struggle ; whether without self- 
reproach he could lead any longer this life of learning and 
indifference to the public weal. He decided as we might have 
expected that he would decide, though some good critics see 



LIFE OF MILTON. XV11 

cause to regret the decision. Milton puts his position very 
clearly in his Defensio Secunda : " I thought it base to be 
travelling for amusement abroad, while my fellow-citizens were 
fighting for liberty at home." And later : " I determined to 
relinquish the other pursuits in which I was engaged, and to 
transfer the whole force of my talents and my industry to this 
one important object" (i.e. the vindication of liberty). 

The summer of 1639 (July) found Milton back in England. 
Immediately after his return he wrote the Epitaphium Damonis, 
the beautiful elegy in which he lamented the death of his school 
friend, Diodati. Lytidas was the last of the English lyrics : the 
Epitaphium, which should be studied in close connection with 
Lycidas, the last of the long Latin poems. Thenceforth, for a 
long spell, the rest was silence, so far as concerned poetry. The 
period which for all men represents the strength and maturity 
of manhood, which in the cases of other poets produces the best 
and most characteristic work, is with Milton a blank. In twenty 
years he composed no more than a bare handful of Sonnets, 
and even some of these are infected by the taint of political 
animus. Other interests claimed him the question of Church- 
reform, education, marriage, and, above all, politics. 

Milton's first treatise upon the government of the Church 
(Of Reformation in England} appeared in 1641. Others 
followed in quick succession. The abolition of Episcopacy 
was the watchword of the enemies of the Anglican Church 
the delenda est Carthago cry of Puritanism, and no one 
enforced the point with greater eloquence than Milton. During 
1641 and 1642 he wrote five pamphlets on the subject. Mean- 
while he was studying the principles of education. On his 
return from Italy he had undertaken the training of his 
nephews. This led to consideration of the best educational 
methods ; and in the Tractate of Education, 1644, Milton 
assumed the part of educational theorist. In the previous year, 
May, 1643, ne married 1 . The marriage proved unfortunate. 

1 His wife (who was only seventeen) was Mary Powell, eldest 
daughter of Richard Powell, of Forest Hill, a village some little 
distance from Oxford. She went to stay with her father in July, 



xviii INTRODUCTION. 

Its immediate outcome was the pamphlets on divorce. Clearly 
he had little leisure for literature proper. 

The finest of Milton's prose works, the Areopagitica, a plea 
for the free expression of opinion, was published in 1644. In 
1645 l appeared the first collection of his poems. In 1649 his 
advocacy of the anti-royalist cause was recognised by the offer 
of a post under the newly appointed Council of State. His bold 
vindication of the trial of Charles I., The Tenure of Kings, had 
appeared earlier in the same year. Milton accepted the offer, 
becoming Latin 2 Secretary to the Committee of Foreign Affairs. 

1643, and refused to return to Milton ; why, it is not certain. She 
was reconciled to her husband in 1645, bore him four children, and 
died in 1652, in her twenty-seventh year. No doubt, the scene in P. L. 
X. 909 36, in which Eve begs forgiveness of Adam, reproduced the 
poet's personal experience, while many passages in Samson Agonistes 
must have been inspired by the same cause. 

1 i.e. old style. The volume was entered on the registers of the 
Stationers' Company under the date of October 6th, 1645. It was 
published on Jan. i, 1645 46, with the following title-page : 

"Poems of Mr. John Milton, both English and Latin^ Composed at 
several times. Printed by his true Copies. The Songs were set in Mustek 
by Mr. Henry Lawes Gentleman of the Kings Chappel, and one of His 
Majesties Private Musick. 

* Baccare front em 

Cingite, ne vati noceat mala lingua futuro.* VlRGIL, Eclog. 7. 
Printed and published according to Order. London, Printed by Rttth 
Raworth for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at the signe of the 
Princes Arms in Pauls Churchyard. 1645." 

From the prefatory Address to the Reader it is clear that the collec- 
tion was due to the initiative of the publisher. Milton's own feeling is 
expressed by the motto, where the words " vatifuturo " show that, as 
he judged, his great achievement was yet to come. The volume was 
divided into two parts, the first containing the English, the second the 
Latin poems. Comus was printed at the close of the former, with a 
separate title-page to mark its importance. The prominence given to 
the name of Henry Lawes reflects Milton's friendship. 

8 A Latin Secretary was required because the Council scorned, as 
Edward Phillips says, "to carry on their affairs in the wheedling, 
lisping jargon of the cringing French." Milton's salary was 288, in 
modern money about 900. 



LIFE OF MILTON. 



XIX 



There was nothing distasteful about his duties. He drew up 
the despatches to foreign governments, translated state-papers, 
and served as interpreter to foreign envoys. Had his duties 
stopped here his acceptance of the post would, I think, have 
proved an unqualified gain. It brought him into contact with the 
first men in the state, gave him a practical insight into the 
working of national affairs and the motives of human action ; in 
a word, furnished him with that experience of life which is 
essential to all poets who aspire to be something more than 
"the idle singers of an empty day." But unfortunately the 
secretaryship entailed the necessity of defending at every turn 
the past course of the revolution and the present policy of the 
Council. Milton, in fact, held a perpetual brief as advocate for 
his party. Hence the endless and unedifying controversies into 
which he drifted ; controversies which wasted the most precious 
years of his life, warped, as some critics think, his nature, and 
eventually cost him his eyesight. 

Between 1649 anc ^ 1660 Milton produced no less than eleven 
pamphlets. Several of these arose out of the publication of the 
famous Eikon Basilike, The book was printed in 1649 and 
created so extraordinary a sensation that Milton was asked to 
reply to it ; and did so with Eikonoklastes. Controversy of this 
barren type has the inherent disadvantage that once started it may 
never end. The Royalists commissioned the Leyden professor, 
Salmasius, to prepare a counterblast, the Defensio Regia, and 
this in turn was met by Milton's Pro Popiilo Anglicano Defensio^ 
1651, over the preparation of which he lost what little power of 
eyesight remained 1 . Salmasius retorted, and died before his 

1 Perhaps this was the saddest part of the episode. Milton tells us 
in the Defensio Secunda that his eyesight was injured by excessive study 
in boyhood : " from twelve years of age I hardly ever left my studies or 
went to bed before midnight." Continual reading and writing increased 
the infirmity, and by 1650 the sight of the left eye had gone. He was 
warned that he must not use the other for book-work. Unfortunately 
this was just the time when the Commonwealth stood most in need of 
his services. If Milton had not written the first Defence he might have 
retained his partial vision, at least for a time. The choice lay between 



XX INTRODUCTION. 

second farrago of scurrilities was issued : Milton was bound to 
answer, and the Defensio Secunda appeared in 1654. Neither 
of the combatants gained anything by the dispute ; while the 
subsequent development of the controversy in which Milton 
crushed the Amsterdam pastor and professor, Morus, goes far to 
prove the contention of Mr Mark Pattison, that it was an evil 
day when the poet left his study at Horton to do battle for the 
Commonwealth amid the vulgar brawls of the market-place . 

"Not here, O Apollo, 
Were haunts meet for thee." 

Fortunately this poetic interregnum in Milton's life was not 
destined to last much longer. The Restoration came, a blessing 
in disguise, and in 1660 J the ruin of Milton's political party 
and of his personal hopes, the absolute overthrow of the cause 
for which he had fought for twenty years, left him free. The 
author of Lycidas could once more become a poet. 

Much has been written upon this second period, 1639 60. 
We saw what parting of the ways confronted Milton on his 
return from Italy. Did he choose aright ? Should he have 
continued upon the path of learned leisure ? There are writers 
who argue that Milton made a mistake. A poet, they say, 
should keep clear of political strife : fierce controversy can 
benefit no man : who touches pitch must expect to be, certainly 
will be, defiled : Milton sacrificed twenty of the best years of 
his life, doing work which an underling could have done and 
which was not worth doing : another Comus might have been 
written, a loftier Lycidas : that literature should be the poorer 
by the absence of these possible masterpieces, that the second 

private good and public duty. He repeated in 1650 the sacrifice of 1639. 
All this is brought out in his Second Defence. By the spring of 1652 
Milton was quite blind He was then in his forty-fourth year. Probably 
the disease from which he suffered was amaurosis. See the Appendix 
(pp. 682, 683) on P. L. HI. 22 26. Throughout P. L. and Samson 
Agonistes there are frequent references to his affliction. 

1 Milton probably began Paradise Lost in 1658; but it was not till 
the Restoration in 1660 that he definitely resigned all his political 
hopes, and became quite free to realise his poetical ambition. 



LIFE OF MILTON. xxi 

greatest genius which England has produced should in a way 
be the " inheritor of unfulfilled renown," is and must be a thing 
entirely and terribly deplorable. This is the view of the purely 
literary critic. 

There remains the other side of the question. It may fairly 
be contended that had Milton elected in 1639 to live the scholar's 
life apart from " the action of men," Paradise Lost, as we have 
it, or Samson Agonistes could never have been written. Know- 
ledge of life and human nature, insight into the problems oi 
men's motives and emotions, grasp of the broader issues of the 
human tragedy, all these were essential to the author of an epic 
poem ; they could only be obtained through commerce with the 
world ; they would have remained beyond the reach of a recluse. 
Dryden complained that Milton saw nature through the spec- 
tacles of books : we might have had to complain that he saw 
men through the same medium. Fortunately it is not so : and 
it is not so because at the age of thirty-two he threw in his 
fortunes with those of his country ; like the diver in Schiller's 
ballad he took the plunge which was to cost him so dear. The 
mere man of letters will never move the world. ^Cschylus fought 
at Marathon : Shakespeare was practical to the tips of his 
fingers ; a better business man than Goethe there was not 
within a radius of a hundred miles of Weimar. 

This aspect of the question is emphasised by Milton himself. 
The man, he says, " who would not be frustrate of his hope to 
write well hereafter in laudable things, ought himself to be a 
true poem , that is, a composition and pattern of the best and 
honourablest things; not presuming to sing high praises of heroic 
men, or famous cities, unless he have in himself the experience 
and the practice of all that which is praiseworthy 1 ." Again, in 
estimating the qualifications which the writer of an epic such as 
he contemplated should possess, he is careful to include 
"insight into all seemly and generous arts and affairs 2 ." 

Truth usually lies half-way between extremes : perhaps it 
does so here. No doubt, Milton did gain very greatly by 

1 An Apology for Smectymnuus, P. W. in. 118. 
a The Reason of Church Government, P. W. II. 481. 



xxii INTRODUCTION. 

breathing awhile the larger air of public life, even though 
that air was often tainted by much impurity. No doubt, too, 
twenty years of contention must have left their mark even on 
Milton. In one of the very few places where he " abides our 
question," Shakespeare writes (Sonnet CXI.) : 

"OI for my sake do you with Fortune chide, 
The guilty goddess of my harmful deeds, 
That did not better for my life provide, 
Than public means, which public manners breeds : 
Thence comes it that my name receives a brand ; 
And almost thence my nature is subdued 
To what it works in, like the dyer's hand." 

Milton's genius was subdued in this way. If we compare 
him, the Milton of the great epics and of Samson Agonistes, 
with Homer or Shakespeare and none but the greatest can 
be his parallel we find in him a certain want of humanity, 
a touch of narrowness. He lacks the large-heartedness, the 
genial, generous breadth of Shakespeare ; the sympathy and 
sense of the lacrimce rerum that even in Troilus and Cressida or 
Timon of Athens are there for those who have eyes wherewith 
to see them. Milton reflects in some degree the less gracious 
aspects of Puritanism, its intolerance, want of humour, one-sided 
intensity ; and it seems natural to assume that this narrowness 
was to a great extent the price he paid for twenty years of cease- 
less special pleading and dispute. The real misfortune of his 
life lay in the fact that he fell on evil, angry days when there 
was no place for moderate men. He had to be one of two 
things : either a controversialist or a student : there was no via 
media. Probably he chose aright ; but we could wish that the 
conditions under which he chose had been different. And he 
is so great, so majestic in the nobleness of his life, in the purity 
of his motives, in the self-sacrifice of his indomitable devotion 
to his ideals, that we could wish not even to seem to pronounce 
judgment at all. 

The last part of Milton's life, 1660 74, passed quietly. At 
the age of fifty-two he was thrown back upon poetry, and could 
at length discharge his self-imposed obligation. The early 



LIFE OF MILTON. xxiii 

poems he had never regarded as a fulfilment of the debt due to 
his Creator. Even when the fire of political strife burned at its 
hottest, Milton did not forget the purpose which he had conceived 
in his boyhood. Of that purpose Paradise Lost was the attain- 
ment. Begun about 1658, it was finished in 1663, the year of 
Milton's third 1 marriage; revised from 1663 to 1665; and 
eventually issued in 1667. Before its publication Milton had 
commenced (in the autumn of 1665) its sequel Paradise Re- 
gained, which in turn was closely followed by Samson Agonistes. 
The completion of Paradise Regained may be assigned to the 
year 1666 that of Samson Agonistes to 1667. Some time was 
spent in their revision ; and in January, 1671, they were pub- 
lished together, in a single volume. 

In 1673 Milton brought out a reprint of the 1645 edition of 
his Poems, adding most of the sonnets 2 written in the interval 3 

1 Milton's second marriage took place in the autumn of 1656, i.e. 
after he had become blind. His wife died in February, 1658. Cf. the 
Sonnet, " Methought I saw my late espoused saint," the pathos of which 
is heightened by the fact that he had never seen her. 

2 The number of Milton's sonnets is twenty-three (if we exclude the 
piece "On the New Forcers of Conscience"), five of which were 
written in Italian, probably during the time of his travels in Italy, 
1638, 1639. Ten sonnets were printed in the edition of 1645, tne l as t f 
them being that entitled (from the Cambridge MS.) "To the Lady 
Margaret Ley." The remaining thirteen were composed between 1645 
and 1658. The concluding sonnet, therefore (to the memory of Milton's 
second wife), immediately preceded his commencement of Paradise Lost. 
Four of these poems (xv. xvi. xvu. xxn.) could not, on account of 
their political tone, be included in the edition of 1673. They were 
published by Edward Phillips together with his memoir of Milton, 1694 
(Sonnet xvu. having previously appeared in a Life of Vane). The 
sonnet on the " Massacre in Piedmont " is usually considered the finest 
of the collection, of which Mr Mark Pattison edited a well-known 
edition, 1883. The sonnet inscribed with a diamond on a window pane 
in the cottage at Chalfont where the poet stayed in 1665 is (in the 
judgment of a good critic) Miltonic, in not Milton's (Garnett, Life of 
Milton, p. 175). 

3 The 1673 edition also gave the juvenile piece On the Death of a 
Fair Infant and At a Vacation Exercise, which for some reason had 
been omitted from the 1645 edition. 



xxiv INTRODUCTION. 

The last four years of his life were devoted to prose works of no 
particular interest 1 . He continued to live in London. His third 
marriage had proved happy, and he enjoyed something of the 
renown which was rightly his. Various well-known men used 
to visit him notably Dryden 2 , who on one of his visits asked 
and received permission to dramatise 3 Paradise Lost It does 
not often happen that a university can point to two such poets 
among her living sons, each without rival in his generation. 

Milton died in 1674, November 8th. He was buried in St 
Giles' Church, Cripplegate. When we think of him we have to 
think of a man who lived a life of very singular purity and 
devotion to duty ; who for what he conceived to be his country's 
good sacrificed and no one can well estimate the sacrifice 
during twenty years the aim that was nearest to his heart and 
best suited to his genius ; who, however, eventually realised his 
desire of writing a great work in gloriam Dei. 

1 The treatise on Christian Doctrine (unpublished during Milton's 
lifetime and dating, it is thought, mainly from the period of his theo- 
logical treatises) is valuable as throwing much light on the theological 
views expressed in the two epic poems and Samson Agonistes. See 
Milton Memorial Lectures (1908), pp. 10942. The discovery of the 
MS. of this treatise in 1823 gave Macaulay an opportunity of writing 
his famous essay on Milton, which has been happily described as a 
Whig counterblast to Johnson's Tory depreciation of the poet. 

Milton's History of Britain, though not published till 1670, had 
been written many years earlier ; four of the six books, we know, were 
composed between 1646 and 1649. 

2 The lines by Dryden which were printed beneath the portrait of 
Milton in Tonson's folio edition of Paradise Lost published in 1688 are 
too familiar to need quotation ; but it is worth noting that the younger 
poet had in Milton's lifetime described the great epic as " one of the 
most noble, and most sublime poems which either this age or nation 
has produced" (prefatory essay to The State of Innocence, 1674). 
Further, tradition assigned to Dryden (a Roman Catholic and a Royal- 
ist) the remark, "this fellow (Milton) cuts us all out and the ancients 
too." 

3 See Marvell's "Commendatory Verses," 17 30, and the Notes, 

PP- 7*> 73- 



PARADISE LOST. XXV 



PARADISE LOST. 

We have seen that the dominating idea of Milton's life was 
his resolve to write a great poem great in theme, in style, in 
attainment. To this purpose was he dedicated as a boy: as 
Hannibal was dedicated, at the altar of patriotism, to the cause 
of his country's revenge, or Pitt to a life of political ambition. 
Milton's works particularly his letters and prose pamphlets 
enable us to trace the growth of the idea which was shaping his 
intellectual destinies ; and as every poet is best interpreted by 
his own words, Milton shall speak for himself. 

Two of the earliest indications of his cherished plan are 
the Vacation Exercise and the second Sonnet. The Exercise 
commences with an invocation (not without significance, as we 
shall see) to his "native language," to assist him in giving 
utterance to the teeming thoughts that knock at the portal of 
his lips, fain to find an issue thence. The bent of these thoughts 
is towards the loftiest themes. Might he choose for himself, he 
would select some "grave subject": 

" Such where the deep transported mind may soar 
Above the wheeling poles, and at Heaven's door 
Look in, and see each blissful deity. 



Then sing of secret things that came to pass 
When beldam Nature in her cradle was." 

But recognising soon that such matters are inappropriate to 
the occasion a College festivity he arrests the flight of his 
muse with a grave descende ccelo, and declines on a lower range 
of subject, more fitting to the social scene and the audience. 
This Exercise was composed in 1628, in Milton's twentieth year, 
or, according to his method of dating, anno cEtatis xix. It is 
important as revealing firstly, the poet's consciousness of the 
divine impulse within, for which poetry is the natural outlet ; 
secondly, the elevation of theme with which that poetry must 
deal. A boy in years, he would like to handle the highest 
'arguments,' challenging thereby comparison with the sacri 

P. L. (, 



xxvi INTRODUCTION. 

vates of inspired verse, the elect few whose poetic appeal is to 
the whole world. A vision of Heaven itself must be unrolled 
before his steadfast eagle-gaze : he will win a knowledge of the 
causes of things such as even Vergil, his master, modestly 
disclaimed. Little wonder, therefore, that, filled with these 
ambitions, Milton did not shrink, only two years later (1629 30), 
from attempting to sound the deepest mysteries of Christianity 
the Nativity and the Passion of Christ ; howbeit, sensible of his 
immaturity, he left his poem on the latter subject unfinished 1 . 

The Sonnet to which reference has been made deserves 
quotation at length : 

" How soon hath Time, the subtle thief of youth, 

Stolen on his wing my three-and-twentieth year ! 

My hasting days fly on with full career, 

But my late spring no bud or blossom shew'th. 
Perhaps my semblance might deceive the truth, 

That I to manhood am arrived so near ; 

And inward ripeness doth much less appear, 

That some more timely-happy spirits endu'th. 
Yet be it less or more, or soon or slow, 

It shall be still in strictest measure even 

To that same lot, however mean or high, 
Toward which Time leads me, and the will of Heaven ; 

All is, if I have grace to use it so, 

As ever in my great Task- Master's eye." 

Mr Mark Pattison justly calls these lines "an inseparable 
part of Milton's biography" : they bring out so clearly the poet's 
solemn devotion to his self-selected task, and his determination 
not to essay the execution of that task until the time of complete 
"inward ripeness" has arrived. The Sonnet was one of the last 
poems composed by Milton during his residence at Cambridg-e. 

1 A passage in the sixth Elegy shows that the Nativity Ode (a 
prelude in some respects to Paradise Lost] was begun on Christmas 
morning, 1629. The Passion may have been composed for the following 
Easter; it breaks off with the notice "This Subject the Author 
finding to be above the years he had when he wrote it, and nothing 
satisfied with what was begun, left it unfinished." Evidently Milton 
was minded to recur to both subjects ; see later. 



PARADISE LOST. XXV11 

The date is 1631. From 1632 to 1638 was a period of almost 
unbroken self-preparation, such as the Sonnet foreshadows. Of 
the intensity of his application to literature a letter written in 
1637 (the exact day being Sept. 7, 1637) enables us to judge. 

" It is my way," he says to Carlo Diodati, in excuse for 
remissness as a correspondent, " to suffer no impediment, no 
love of ease, no avocation whatever, to chill the ardour, to break 
the continuity, or divert the completion of my literary pursuits. 
From this and no other reasons it often happens that I do not 
readily employ my pen in any gratuitous exertions 1 ." But these 
exertions were not sufficient : the probation must last longer. In 
the same month, on the 23rd, he writes to the same friend, who 
had made enquiry as to his occupations and plans : " I am sure 
that you wish me to gratify your curiosity, and to let you know 
what I have been doing, or am meditating to do. Hear me, my 
Diodati, and suffer me for a moment to speak without blushing 
in a more lofty strain. Do you ask what I am meditating ? By 
the help of Heaven, an immortality of fame. But what am 
I doing? TTTpo(f)v5)j I am letting my wings grow and preparing 
to fly; but my Pegasus has not yet feathers enough to soar 
aloft in the fields of air 2 ." Four years later we find a similar 
admission " I have neither yet completed to my mind the full 
circle of my private studies... 3 ." 

This last sentence was written in 1640 (or 1641). Meanwhile 
his resolution had been confirmed by the friendly and flattering 
encouragement of Italian savants a stimulus which he records 
in an oft-cited passage 4 : 

"In the private academies 5 of Italy, whither I was favoured 

1 P. W. in. 492. 2 P m IIL 5> 

3 P. W. n. 47 6. 

4 The Reason of Church Government, P. W. 11. 477, 478 ; a few 
lines have been quoted in the Life of Milton. A passage similar to the 
concluding sentence might be quoted from the pamphlet Animadversions, 
published the same year (1641) as the Church Government-, see P. IV. 
in. 72. 

5 He refers to literary societies or clubs, of which there were several 
at Florence, e.g. the Delia Crusca, the Svogliati, etc. 

C 2 



xxvin INTRODUCTION. 

to resort, perceiving that some trifles 1 which I had in memory, 
composed at under twenty or thereabout, (for the manner is, 
that every one must give some proof of his wit and reading 
there,) met with acceptance above what was looked for ; and 
other things 2 , which I had shifted in scarcity of books and 
conveniences to patch up amongst them, were received with 
written encomiums, which the Italian is not forward to bestow 
on men of this side the Alps ; I began thus far to assent both 
to them and divers of my friends here at home, and not less to 
an inward prompting which now grew daily upon me, that by 
labour and intense study (which I take to be my portion in this 
life), joined with the strong propensity of nature, I might perhaps 
leave something so written to aftertimes, as they should not 
willingly let it die." 

It was during this Italian journey (1638 39) that Milton 
first gave a hint of the particular direction in which this ambition 
was setting : at least we are vouchsafed a glimpse of the possible 
subject-matter of the contemplated poem, and there is that on 
which may be built conjecture as to its style. He had enjoyed 
at Naples the hospitality of the then famous writer Giovanni 
Battista Manso, whose courteous reception the young English 
traveller, ut ne ingratutn se ostenderet^ acknowledged in the piece 
of Latin hexameters afterwards printed in his Sylv(z under the 
title Mansus. In the course of the poem Milton definitely speaks 
of the remote legends of British history more especially, the 
Arthurian legend as the theme which he might some day treat. 
" May I," he says, "find such a friend 3 as Manso," 

1 i.e. Latin pieces; the Elegies, as well as some of the poems 
included in his Sylva, were written before he was twenty-one. 

2 Among the Latin poems which date from his Italian journey are 
the lines Ad Sahillum, a few of the Epigrams, and Mansus. Perhaps, 
too, the "other things" comprehended those essays in Italian verse 
which he had the courage to read before a Florentine audience, and 
they the indulgence to praise. 

3 i.e. a friend who would pay honour to him as Manso had paid 
honour to the poet Marini. Manso had helped in the erection of a 
monument to Marini at Naples ; and Milton alludes to this at the 
beginning of the poem. From Manso he would hear about Tasso. 



PARADISE LOST. XXIX 

" Siquando 1 indigenas revoeabo in carnina reges, 
Artururnque etiani sub terris bella moventem, 
Aut dicam invictce sociali feeders mensce 
Mngnaniiiios heroas, et (O modo spiritus adsif) 
Frangam Saxonicas Britonum sub Marie phalanges ! " 

This was in 1638. In the next year, after his return to 
England, he recurs to the project in the Epitapkium Damonis 
(162 71), his account being far more detailed : 

"Ipse"* 1 ego Dardanias Riitupina per aquora puppes 
Dicam, et Pandrasidos regnum vetus Inogenitz, 
Brennumque Arviragumque duccs, priscumqu? Belinum, 
Et tandem Armoricos Britonum sub lege colonos ; 
Turn gravidam Arturo fatali fraude logernen; 
Mendaces vultus, assumptaque Gorlois anna, 
Merlini dolus. O, mihi turn si vita supersit, 
Tu procul annosa pendebis, fistula, pinu, 
Multum oblita mihi, aut patriis mutata Camccnis 
Brittonicum strides ! " 

Here, as before, he first glances at the stories which date 
from the very dawn of British myth and romance, and then 

1 "If ever I shall revive in verse our native kings, and Arthur 
levying war in the world below ; or tell of the heroic company of 
the resistless Table Round, and be the inspiration mine ! break the 
Saxon bands neath the might of British chivalry" (Mansus, 80 84). 
His Common-place Book has a quaint reference to " Arturs round 
table." 

2 "I will tell of the Trojan fleet sailing our southern seas, and the 
ancient realm of Imogen, Pandrasus' daughter, and of Brennus, Arvi- 
ragus, and Belinus old, and the Armoric settlers subject to British laws. 
Then will I sing of logerne, fatally pregnant with Arthur how Uther 
feigned the features and assumed the armour of Gorlois, through 
Merlin's craft. And you, my pastoral pipe, an life be lent me, shall 
hang on some sere pine, forgotten of me; or changed to native notes 
shall shrill forth British strains." In the first lines he alludes to the 
legend of Brutus and the Trojans landing in England. Riitupina=. 
Kentish. The story of Arthur's birth at which he glances is referred to 
in the Idylls of the King. The general drift of the last verses is that he 
will give up Latin for English verse ; strides is a future, from strido (cf. 
<neid iv. 689). 



INTRODUCTION. 

passes to the most fascinating of the later cycles of national 
legend the grey traditions that cluster round the hero of the 
Idylls of the King, the son of mythic Uther. And this passage, 
albeit the subject which it indicates was afterwards rejected by 
Milton, possesses a twofold value for those who would follow, 
step by step, the development of the idea which had as its 
final issue the composition of Paradise Lost. For, first, the 
concluding verses show that whatever the theme of the poem, 
whatever the style, the instrument of expression would be 
English. Just as Dante had weighed the merits of the 
vernacular and Latin and chosen the former, though the choice 
imposed on him the creation of an ideal, transfigured Italian 
out of the baser elements of many competing dialects,. so Milton 
more fortunate than Dante in that he found an instrument 
ready to use will use that "native language" whose help he had 
petitioned in the Vacation Exercise. An illustration of his 
feeling on this point is furnished by the treatise on Church 
Government, He says there that his work must make for " the 
honour and instruction" of his country: "I applied myself to 
that resolution which Ariosto followed... to fix all the industry 
and art I could unite to the adorning of my native tongue ; not 
to make verbal curiosities the end (that were a toilsome vanity), 
but to be an interpreter and relater of the best and sagest things 
among mine own citizens throughout this island in the mother 
dialect. That what the greatest and choicest wits of Athens, 
Rome, or modern Italy, and those Hebrews of old did for their 
country, I, in my proportion, with this over and above, of being 
a Christian, might do for mine 1 ; not caring to be once named 

1 P. W. n. 478. Reference has been made so frequently to this 
pamphlet on The Reason of Church Government urged against Prclaty, 
(1641), that it may be well to explain that the introduction to the 
second book is entirely autobiographical. Milton shows why he em- 
barked on such controversies, how much it cost him to do so, what 
hopes he had of returning to poetry, what was his view of the poet's 
mission and of his own capacity to discharge that mission. His prose 
works contain nothing more valuable than these ten pages of self- 
criticism. 



PARADISE LOST. xxxi 

abroad, though perhaps I could attain to that, but content with 
these British islands as my world." Here is a clear announce- 
ment of his ambition to take rank as a great national poet. The 
note struck is patriotism. He will produce that which shall set 
English on a level with the more favoured Italian, and give his 
countrymen cause to be proud of their 

"dear dear land, 
Dear for her reputation through the world 1 ." 

To us indeed it may appear strange that Milton should 
have thought it worth while to emphasise what would now 
be considered a self-evident necessity : what modern poet, 
with a serious conception of his office and duty, would dream 
of employing any other language than his own ? But we must 
remember that in those days the empire of the classics was 
unquestioned : scholarship was accorded a higher dignity than 
now : the composition of long poems in Latin was still a custom 
honoured in the observance : and whoso sought to appeal to 
the "laureate fraternity" of scholars and men of letters, in- 
dependently of race and country, would naturally turn to the 
lingua franca of the learned. At any rate, the use of English 
less known than either Italian or French placed a poet at a 
great disadvantage, so far as concerned acceptance in foreign 
lands ; and when Milton determined to rely on his patrice 
Camcence, he foresaw that this would circumscribe his audience, 
and that he might have to rest content with the applause of his 
own countrymen. 

Again, these lines in the Epitaphium give us some grounds 
of surmise as to the proposed form of his poem. The historic 
events or traditions epitomised in the passage were too far 
separated in point of time, and too devoid of internal coherence 
and connection, to admit of dramatic treatment. Milton evi- 
dently contemplated a narrative poem, and for one who had 
drunk so deep of the classical spirit a narrative could scarce 
have meant aught else than an epic. Indeed thus much is 
implied by some sentences in The Reason of Church Govern- 

1 Richard 1L n. i. 57, 58. 



XXX11 INTRODUCTION. 

mentj which represent him as considering whether to attempt 
" that epic form whereof the two poems of Homer, and those 
other two of Virgil and Tasso, are a diffuse, and the book of Job 
a brief model... or whether those dramatic constitutions, wherein 
Sophocles and Euripides reign, shall be found more doctrinal 
and exemplary to a nation 1 ." 

But 'dramatic' introduces a fresh phase; and as the first 
period of the history of Paradise Lost, or rather of the idea 
which finally took shape in that poem, closes with the Epita- 
phium (1639), it may not be amiss to summarise the impressions 
deduced up to this point from the various passages which we 
have quoted from Milton. We have seen, then, Milton's early 
resolve ; its ambitious scope ; his self-preparation ; the en- 
couragement he received in Italy and from friends at home ; 
his announcement in 1638, repeated in 1639, that he has 
discovered a suitable subject in British fable more especially, 
in the legend of the Coming and Passing of Arthur ; his formal 
farewell to Latin verse, in favour of his native tongue; his desire 
to win recognition as a great national vates ; and his selection 
of the epic style. 

In respect of chronology we have reached the year 1639 
40. The second period extends from 1640 to 1642. We shall 
see that, some verses of Paradise Lost were written about 1642 : 
after 1642, up till 1658, we hear no more of the poem proof 
that the idea has been temporarily abandoned under stress of 
politics. Therefore 1642 may be regarded as the ulterior limit 
of this second period. And it is not, I think, fanciful to consider 
that Paradise Lost entered on a fresh stage about 1640, because 
between that year and 1642 Milton's plans underwent a twofold 
change by which the character of the poem was entirely altered. 

First, the subject for which he had shown so decided a bias 
is discarded : after 1639 no mention is made of King Arthur. 
We have no hint of the cause which led Milton to drop the 
subject ; but it may well have lain in his increasing re- 
publicanism. He could not have treated the theme from an 

1 P. W. ii. 47 8, 479. 



PARADISE LOST. xxxiii 

unfavourable standpoint. The hero of the poem must have 
been for him, as for the Milton of our own age, a type of 
all kingly grandeur and worth ; and it would have gone sore 
against the grain with the future apologist for regicide to exercise 
his powers in creating a royal figure that would shed lustre on 
monarchy, and in a measure plead for the institution which 
Milton detested so heartily 1 . Only a Royalist could have retold 
the story, making it illustrate " the divine right of kings," and 
embodying in the character of the blameless monarch the 
Cavalier conception of Charles I. Perhaps too he was in- 
fluenced by discovering, after fuller research, the mythical 
character of the legend. So much is rather implied by some 
remarks in his History of Britain. Milton with his intense 
earnestness was not the poet to build a long work on what he 
had found to be mainly fiction. Be this as it may, Milton 
rejected the subject, and it finds no place in a list of one 
hundred possible subjects of his poem. 

Secondly, from this period, 1640 42, dates an alteration 
in the design of the contemplated work. Hitherto his tendency 
has been towards the epic form: now (1640 or 1641) we find 
him preferring the dramatic. Shall he imitate Sophocles and 
Euripides ? Shall he transplant to English soil the art of the 
" lofty grave tragedians " of Greece ? The question is answered 
in a decided affirmative. Had Milton continued the poem of 
which the opening lines were written in 1642 we should have 
had not an epic but a drama, or possibly a trilogy of dramas, 
cast in a particular manner, as will be observed presently. 
This transference of his inclinations from the epic to the 
"dramatic style appears to date from 1641. It is manifested in 
the Milton MSS. at Trinity College. . 

When the present library of Trinity College, the erection of 
which was begun during the Mastership of Isaac Barrow, was 
completed, one of its earliest benefactors was a former member 
of Trinity, Sir Henry Newton Puckering. Among his gifts was 
a thin MS. volume of fifty-four pages, which had served Milton 
as a common-place book. How it came into the possession of 
Sir Henry Puckering is not known. He was contemporary 
1 See the notes on P. L. xu. 24, 36. 



xxxiv INTRODUCTION. 

with, though junior to, Milton, and may possibly have been one 
of the admirers who visited the poet in the closing years of his 
life, and discharged the office of amanuensis ; or perhaps there 
was some family connection by means of which the MS. passed 
into his hands. But if the history of the book be obscure, its 
value is not ; for it contains now in Milton's autograph, now 
in other, unidentified handwritings the original drafts of several 
of his early poems : notably of Arcades, Lycidas and Camus, 
together with many of the Sonnets. The volume is not a 
random collection of scattered papers bound together after 
Milton's death : it exists (apart from its sumptuous modern 
investiture) exactly in the same form as that wherein Milton 
knew and used it two centuries and a half agone. And this 
point is important because the order of the pages, and, by 
consequence, of their contents, is an index to the order of the 
composition of the poems. Milton, about the year 1631, had 
had the sheets of paper stitched together and then worked 
through the little volume, page on page, inserting his pieces as 
they were written. They cover a long period, from 16 to 1658: 
the earlier date being marked by the second Sonnet, the later 
by the last of the series " Methought I saw." It is rather more- 
than half way through the MS. that we light on the entries 
which have so direct a bearing on the history of Paradise Lost. 
These are notes, written by Milton himself (probably in 
1641), and occupying seven pages of the manuscript, on subjects 
which seemed to him suitable, in varying degrees of appropriate- 
ness, for his poem. Some of the entries are very brief concise 
jottings down, in two or three words, of any theme that struck 
him. Others are more detailed : the salient features of some 
episode in history are selected, and a sketch of the best method 
of treating them added. In a few instances these sketches are 
filled in with much minuteness and care: the 'economy' or 
arrangement of the poem is marked out the action traced from 
point to point. But, Paradise Lost apart, this has been done in 
only a few cases a half dozen, at most. As a rule, the source 
whence the material of the work might be drawn is indicated. 
The subjects themselves, numbering just one hundred, fall, in a 
rough classification, under two headings Scriptural and British : 



PARADISE LOST. XXXV 

and by * British ' are meant those which Milton drew from the 
chronicles of British history prior to the Norman Conquest. 
The former are the more numerous class : sixty-two being 
derived from the Bible, of which the Old Testament claims 
fifty-four. Their character will be best illustrated by quotation 
of a few typical examples : 

Abram in .Egypt. 
Josuah in Gibeon. Josu. 10. 
Jonathan rescu'd Sam. I. 14. 
Saul in Gilboa i Sam. -28. 31. 
Gideon Idoloclastes Jud. 6. 7. 
Abimelech the usurper. Jud. 9. 
Samaria liberata 1 2 Reg. 7. 
Asa or ^Ethiopes. 2 chron. 14. with 
the deposing his mother, and burning her Idol. 

These are some of the subjects drawn from the New Testa- 
ment : 

Christ bound 

Christ crucifi'd 

Christ risen. 

Lazarus Joan. n. 

Christus patiens 

The Scene in y e garden beginning fr5 y e comming thither till 
Judas betraies & y e officers lead him away y e rest by message & 
chorus, his agony may receav noble expressions 

Of British subjects 2 there are thirty-three. The last page is 
assigned to " Scotch stories or rather brittish of the north parts. 1 ' 
Among these Macbeth is conspicuous. Practically they may be 
grouped with the thirty-three, and the combined list is remark- 
able first, because it does not include the Arthurian legend, 

1 The title is an obvious allusion to Tasso's Gerusalemme Liberata. 

2 Milton's attitude towards them is illustrated indirectly by his 
History of Britain. In his paper on " Milton as an Historian " read 
before the British Academy recently (Nov. 25, 1908) Professor Frith 
says : " It was not only by his treatment of the mythical period of 
English history that Milton's interest in the legendary and anecdotic 
side of history was revealed. It appeared in the later books as well 
as the earlier, and the introduction of certain episodes, or the space 
devoted to them, might often be explained by their inclusion in the 
list of suggested subjects for his ' British Tragedies.' " 



XXXVI INTRODUCTION. 

which had once exercised so powerful a fascination on Milton ; 
secondly, because in its brevity, as compared with the list of 
Scriptural subjects, it suggests his preference for a sacred poem. 
Of the Scriptural subjects the story of the Creation and Fall 
assumes the most prominent place. Any friend of Milton 
glancing through these papers in 1641 could have conjectured, 
with tolerable certainty, where the poet's final choice would fall. 
For no less than four of the entries refer to Paradise Lost. 
Three of these stand at the head of the list of sacred themes. 
In two at least his intention to treat the subject in dramatic 
form is patent. The two first mere enumerations of possible 
dramatis persona run thus 1 ; it will be seen that the longer list 
is simply an expansion of the other : 

the Persons the Persons 

Michael. Moses 2 

Heavenly Love Justice 8 . Mercie Wisdome 

Chorus of Angels Heavenly Love 

Lucifer Hesperus the Evening Staire 

dam l with the serpent ^ho* of Angels 

Eve | Lucifer 

Conscience Adam 

Death Eve 

Labour  Conscience 4 

Sicknesse Labour  

Discontent - mutes Sicknesse | 

Ignorance Discontent i 

with others Ignorance f 

Faith Feare 

Hope Death  

Charity Faith 

Hope 

Charity 

1 Neither is introduced with any title. 

2 Milton first wrote " Michael," as in the other list, but substituted 
" Moses." 

3 The epithet Divine, qualifying Justice, was inserted and then 
crossed out again. "Wisdome" was added. 

4 After Conscience Milton added Death, as in the first list ; then 
deleted it, and placed Death among the ' mutes ' (inutce persona, 
characters who appeared without speaking). 



mutes 



PARADISE LOST. xxxvii 

These lists are crossed out ; and underneath stands a much 
fuller sketch, in which the action of the tragedy is shown, and 
the division into acts observed. Here, too, we first meet with 
the title Paradise Lost. The scheme is as follows : 

Paradise Lost The Persons 

Moses irpoXoyifei recounting how he assum'd his true bodie, that it 
corrupts not because of his with god in the mount declares the 
like of Enoch and Eliah, besides the purity of y e pi 1 that certaine 
pure winds, dues, and clouds preserve it from corruption whence 
horts 1 to the sight of god, tells they 2 cannot se Adam in the state of 
innocence by reason of thire sin 3 
Justice ^j 

Mercie V debating what should become of man if he fall 
WisdomeJ 
Chorus of Angels sing a hymne of y e creation 4 

Act 2. 

Heavenly Love 
Evening starre 
chorus sing the mariage song 5 and describe Paradice 

Act 3. 

Lucifer contriving Adams ruine 

Chorus feares for Adam and relates Lucifers rebellion and fall 6 

Act 4. 

Adam) - ., 

V fallen 
Eve j 

Conscience cites them to Gods examination 7 
Chorus bewails and tells the good Ada hath lost 

1 The margin of the MS. is frayed here. 

2 they, i.e. the imaginary audience to whom the prologue is 
addressed. Cf. the commencement of Comus. 

3 After this the first act begins. 

4 Cf. vii. 253 60, note. 

6 Cf. iv. 711. Cf. bks. V VI. 

7 Cf. x. 97 et stq. 



mutes to whome he gives thire names 
likewise winter, heat Tempest 2 &c 



XXXV111 INTRODUCTION. 



Act 5 

Adam and Eve, driven out of Paradice 

presented by an angel with 1 
Labour 
greife 
hatred 
Envie 
warre 
famine 
Pestilence 
sicknesse 
discontent 
Ignorance 
Feare 

Death enterd 
into y e world 
Faith | 

Hope > comfort him and Istruct him 
Charity! 
Chorus breifly concludes 

This draft of the tragedy, which occurs on page 35 of the 
MS., is not deleted ; but Milton was still dissatisfied, and later 
on, page 40, we come to a fourth, and concluding, scheme 
which reads thus : 

Adam unparadiz'd 3 

The angel Gabriel, either descending or entering 4 , shewing since 
this globe was created, his frequency as much on earth, as in heavn, 
describes Paradise, next the Chorus shewing the reason of his 5 comming 
to keep his watch in Paradise after Lucifers rebellion by command from 
god, & withall expressing his desire to see, & know more concerning 
this excellent new creature man. the angel Gabriel as by his name 

1 Cf. bks. xi xn. 2 See X. 651, note. 

3 Underneath was written, and crossed out, an alternative title 
Adams Banishment. 

4 Cf. Comus, "The Attendant Spirit descends or enters" (adinit. ). 

5 his^ i.e. the chorus's ; he makes the chorus now a singular, now a 
plural, noun. 



PARADISE LOST. xxxix 

signifying a prince of power tracing 1 paradise with a more free office 
passes by the station of y e chorus & desired by them relates what he 
knew of man as the creation of Eve with thire love, & manage, after 
this Lucifer appeares after his overthrow, bemoans himself, seeks 
revenge on man the Chorus prepare resistance at his first approach 
at last after discourse of enmity on either side he departs wherat the 
chorus sings of the battell, & victorie in heavn against him & his 
accomplices, as before after the first act 2 was sung a hymn of the 
creation, heer 3 again may appear Lucifer relating, & insulting in what 
he had don to the destruction of man. man next & Eve having by this 
time bin seduc't by the serpent appeares confusedly cover'd with 
leaves conscience in a shape accuses him, Justice cites him to the place 
whither Jehova call'd for him in the mean while the chorus entertains 4 
the stage, & his [sic] inform'd by some angel the manner of his fall heer 3 
the chorus bewailes Adams fall. Adam then & Eve returne accuse one 
another but especially Adam layes the blame to his wife, is stubborn in 
his offence Justice appeares reason 5 with him convinces him the 3 chorus 
admonisheth Adam, & bids him beware by Luciters example of 
impenitence the Angel is sent to banish them out of paradise but before 
causes to passe before his eyes in shapes a mask of all the evills 6 of this 
life & world he is humbl'd relents, dispaires. at last appeares Mercy 
comforts him promises the Messiah, then calls in faith, hope, & charity, 
instructs him he repents gives god the glory, submitts to his penalty 
the chorus breifly concludes, compare this with the former draught. 

" It appears plain," says Todd, " that Milton intended to have 
marked the division of the Acts in this sketch, as well as in 
the preceding. Peck has divided them ; and closes the first Act 
with Adam and Eve's love." The other Acts may be supposed 
to conclude at the following points : Act 2 at " sung a hymn of 
the creation"; Act 3 at "inform'd... the manner of his fall"; 
Act 4 at "bids him beware... impenitence" ; Act 5 at "the chorus 
breifly concludes." 

It is in regard to the first Act that this fourth draft, which 

1 passing through ; cf. Comus, 423. 

2 i.e. in the third draft. 

3 Each of these sentences was an after-thought, added below or in 
the margin. 

1 occupies. & i-e. reasons ; or ' to reason.' 

6 See xi. 47793. note. 



xi INTRODUCTION. 

Milton bids us "compare with the former," marks a distinct 
advance. Milton made Moses the speaker of the prologue in 
the third draft because so much of the subject-matter of 
Paradise Lost is drawn from the Mosaic books of the Old 
Testament. But the appearance of a descendant of Adam, 
even in a prologue, where much latitude is allowed by con- 
vention, seems an awkward prelude to scenes coincident with 
Adam's own creation. It is far more natural that, before the 
subject of man's fall is touched upon at all, we should be told 
who man is, and that this first mention of him should come 
from the supernatural beings who had, or might have, witnessed 
the actual creation of the universe and its inhabitants. The 
explanation, too, why Moses is able to assume his natural body 
is very forced. And altogether this fourth draft exhibits more 
of drama, less of spectacle, than its predecessor. 

With regard to the subject, therefore, thus much is clear : 
as early as 1641 2 Milton has manifested an unmistakeable 
preference for the story of the lost Paradise, and the evidence 
of the Trinity MSS. coincides with the testimony of Aubrey and 
Phillips, who say that the poet did, about 1642, commence the 
composition of a drama on this theme of which drama the 
opening verses of Paradise Lost, book IV. (Satan's address to 
the sun), formed the exordium. It is, I think, by no means 
improbable that some other portions of the epic are really 
fragments of this unfinished work. Milton may have written 
two or three hundred lines, have kept them in his desk, and 
then, years afterward, when the project was resumed, have made 
use of them where opportunity offered. Had the poem, however, 
been completed in accordance with his original conception we 
should have had a tragedy, not an epic. 

Of this there is abundant proof. The third and fourth 
sketches, as has been observed, are dramatic. On the first 
page of these entries, besides those lists of dramatis persona 
which we have treated as the first and second sketches, stand 
the words "other Tragedies," followed by the enumeration of 
several feasible subjects. The list of British subjects is 
prefaced with the heading "British Trag." (i.e. tragedies). 



PARADISE LOST. xli 

Wherever Milton has outlined the treatment of any of the 
Scriptural themes a tragedy is clearly indicated. Twice, indeed, 
another form is mentioned the pastoral, and probably a 
dramatic pastoral was intended 1 . These, however, are ex- 
ceptions, serving to emphasise his leaning towards tragedy. 

But what sort of tragedy ? I think we may fairly conclude 
that, if carried out on the lines laid down in the fourth sketch, 
Adam unparadiz'd would have borne a very marked resem- 
blance to Samson Agonistes : it would have conformed, in the 
main, to the same type that, namely, of the ancient Greek 
drama. With the romantic stage of the Elizabethans Milton 
appears to have felt little sympathy 2 : else he would scarce have 
written  Penseroso, 101, 102. Nor do I believe that his 
youthful enthusiasm for Shakespeare remained unmodified 3 : 
certainly, the condemnation of one important aspect of Shake- 
spearian tragedy in the preface to Samson Agonistes is too plain 
to be misinterpreted. So had Milton been minded to dramatise 
the story of Macbeth we have marked its presence in the list 
of Scottish subjects his Macbeth would have differed toto ccelo 
from Shakespeare's. In the same way, his tragedy of Paradise 
Lost would have been wholly un-Shakespearian, wholly un- 
Elizabethan. Nor would it have had any affinity to the drama 
of Milton's contemporaries 4 , those belated Elizabethans bungling 
with exhausted materials and forms that had lost all vitality. 
Tragedy for Milton could mean but one thing the tragic stage 
of the Greeks, the " dramatic constitutions " of Sophocles and 
Euripides : and when we examine these sketches of Paradise 

1 These are the two entries in the MS. : " Theristria. a Pastoral out 
of Ruth " ; and " the sheepshearers in Carmel a Pastoral, i Sam. 25." 
There is but one glance at the epical style ; in the list of " British Trag." 
after mentioning an episode in the life of King Alfred appropriate to 
dramatic handling, he adds "A Heroicall Poem may be founded 
somwhere in Alfreds reigne. especially at his issuing out of Edelingsey 
on the Danes, whose actions are wel like those of Ulysses." 

2 See Appendix to Samson Agonistes. 

3 See note on V Allegro, 133, 134. 

4 In the treatise On Education, 1644, he speaks of "our common 
rhymers and play-writers" as "despicable creatures," P. W. III. 474. 

P. L. d 



xlii INTRODUCTION, 

Lost we find in them the familiar features of Athenian drama 
certain signs eloquent of the source on which the poet has 
drawn. 

Let us, for example, glance at the draft of Adam unparadiz* d. 
Milton has kept the 'unities' of place and time. The scene 
does not change ; it is set in some part of Eden, and everything 
represented before the eyes of the audience occurs at the same 
spot. But whoso regards the unity of place must suffer a 
portion of the action to happen off the stage not enacted in 
the presence of the audience (as in a modern play where the 
scene changes), but reported. In Samson Agonistes Milton 
employs the traditional device of the Greek tragedians he 
relates the catastrophe by the mouth of a messenger. So here : 
the temptation by the serpent is not represented on the scene : 
it is described partly by Lucifer, "relating, and insulting in 
what he had don to the destruction of man"; partly by an angel 
who informs the Chorus of the manner of the fall. Again, the 
unity of time is observed. The time over which the action of a 
tragedy might extend, according to the usual practice of the 
Greek dramatists, was twenty-four hours. In Samson Agonistes 
the action begins at sunrise and ends at noon, thus occupying 
seven or eight hours. In Adam unparaditfd the action would 
certainly not exceed the customary twenty-four hours. Again a 
Chorus is introduced (sure sign of classical influence), and not 
only introduced, but handled exactly as Milton, following his 
Greek models, has handled it in Samson Agonistes : that is to 
say, closely identified with the action of the tragedy, even as 
Aristotle recommends that it should be. Further, in the fourth 
scheme the division into acts is carefully avoided an advance 
this on the third scheme. Similarly, in Samson Agonistes 
Milton avoids splitting up the play into scenes and acts, calling 
attention to the fact in his preface. Proofs 1 of Milton's 

1 Thus, apart from P. L., the Scriptural themes whereof the fullest 
sketches are given, are three tragedies severally entitled " Abram from 
Morea, or Isack redeemed Baptistes" (i.e. on the subject of John the 
Baptist and Herod) and "Sodom Burning." In each two unities 
(time and place) are kept, and a Chorus used. In " Isack redeemed" the 



PARADISE LOST. xliii 

classical bias might be multiplied from these Milton MSS. ; 
and personally I have no doubt that when he began the tragedy 
of which Aubrey and Phillips speak, he meant to revive in 
English the methods and style of his favourite Greek poets. 
But the scheme soon had to be abandoned ; and not till a 
quarter of a century later was it executed in Samson Agonistcs 
With Milton as with Dante the greatest came last after long 
delay : the life's work of each marked the life's close : and, 
the work done, release soon came to each, though to Dante 
sooner 2 . 

The third period in the genesis of Paradise Lost dates from 
1658. In that year, according to Aubrey, Milton began the 
poem as we know it. By then he had gone back to the epic 
style. He was still Secretary, but his duties were very light, 
and allowed him to devote himself to poetry. At the Restoration 
he was in danger, for some time, of his life, and was imprisoned 
for a few months. But in spite of this interruption, and of his 
blindness 3 , the epic was finished about 1663. The history of 

incident of the sacrifice is reported, and the description of the character 
of the hero Abraham as Milton meant to depict him is simply a 
paraphrase on Aristotle's definition of the ideal tragic hero. Most of 
the other subjects have a title such as the Greek tragedians employed 
e.g. " Elias Polemistes," "Elisseus Hydrochoos," "Zedechiah jeore- 



1 The point is important because it disposes of the notion that 
Milton borrowed the idea of writing a tragedy on the classical model 
from the play of Samson by the Dutch poet Vondel. 

2 "There is at once similarity and difference in the causes which 
made each postpone the execution of his undertaking till a comparatively 
late period in his life ; and a curious parallel may be observed in the 
length of time between the first conception and the completion of their 
monumental works, as well as in the period that elapsed between the 
end of their labours and their death." (Courthope.) 

3 According to Edward Phillips, Milton dictated the poem to any 
one who chanced to be present and was willing to act as amanuensis; 
afterwards Phillips would go over the MS., correcting errors, under his 
uncle's direction. The original transcript submitted to the Licenser is 
extant, and is one of the many literary treasures that have gone to 






xliv INTRODUCTION. 

each of his longer poems shows that he was exceedingly careful 
in revising his works loth to let them go forth to the world till 
all that was possible had been done to achieve perfection 1 . It is 
Aubrey's statement that Paradise Lost was completed in 1663 ; 
while Milton's friend Thomas Ellwood, the Quaker, describes 
in a famous passage of his Autobiography, how in 1665 the poet 
placed a manuscript in his hands " bidding me take it home 
with me and read it at my leisure, and, when I had so done, 
return it to him with my judgment thereupon. When I came 
home, and had set myself to read it, I found it was that ex- 
cellent poem which he intituled Paradise Lost" Ellwood's 
account may be reconciled with Aubrey's on the reasonable 
supposition that the interval between 1663 and 1665 was spent 
in revision. Still, some delay in publishing the poem ensued. 
On the outbreak of the Plague in 1665 Milton had left London, 
retiring to Chalfont in Buckinghamshire, where Ellwood had 
rented a cottage for him. He returned in the next year, 1666 ; 
but again there was delay this time through the great Fire 
of London which disorganised business. . Not till 1667 did 
Paradise Lost appear in print. The agreement (now in the 
possession of the British Museum) drawn up between Milton 
and his publisher by which he received an immediate payment 
of ^5, and retained certain rights over the future sale of the 
book is dated April 27, 1667. The date on which Paradise 
Lost was entered in the Stationers' Register is August 20, 1667. 
No doubt, copies were in circulation in the autumn of this year. 

America. It "passed from the possession of the first printer of the 
poem, Samuel Simmons, to Jacob Tonson [the publisher], and thence 
to his collateral descendants, remaining in the same family... until 
1904," when it was bought by an American collector. (From an 
article in The Athenaum on " Miltoniana in America.") 

1 "When we look at his earlier manuscripts, with all their erasures 
and corrections, we may well wonder what the Paradise Lost would have 
been if he had been able to give it the final touches of a faultless and 
fastidious hand. When we think of it composed in darkness, preserved 
in memory, dictated in fragments, it may well seem to us the most 
astonishing of all the products of high genius guided by unconquerable 
will" (J. W. Mackail). 



PARADISE LOST. xlv 

The system of licensing publications, against which Milton 
had protested so vehemently in his Areopagitica, had been revived 
by the Press Act of 1662 and was now strongly enforced. " By 
that act," says Dr Masson, " the duty of licensing books of general 
literature had been assigned to the Secretaries of State, the 
Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Bishop of London ; but it 
was exceptional for any of those dignitaries to perform the duty 
in person. It was chiefly performed for them by a staff of under- 
licencers, paid by fees. 37 Five or six of his chaplains acted so for 
the Archbishop ; and according to tradition one of them, to 
whom Paradise Lost was submitted, hesitated to give his im- 
primatur on account of the lines in the first book about eclipses 
perplexing monarchs with fear of change (i. 594 99). Milton 
must have remembered grimly the bitter gibes in his pamphlets, 
e.g. in the A nimadversions (1641) against "monkish prohibitions, 
and expurgatorious indexes," and "proud Imprimaturs not to be 
obtained without the shallow surview, but not shallow hand of 
some mercenary, narrow-souled, and illiterate chaplain." The 
wheel had come full circle with a vengeance. 

This first edition of Paradise Lost raises curious points 1 of 
bibliography into which there is no need to enter here ; but we 
must note three things. The poem was divided into not 
twelve books but ten. In the earlier copies issued to the 
public there were no prose Arguments ; these (written, we may 
suppose, by Milton himself) were printed all together and 
inserted at the commencement of each of the later volumes of 



1 For example, no less than nine distinct title-pages of this edition 
have been traced. This means that, though the whole edition was 
printed in 1667, only a limited number of copies were bound up and 
issued in that year. The rest would be kept in stock, unbound, and 
published in instalments, as required. Hence new matter could be 
inserted (such as the prose Arguments)^ and in each instalment it would 
be just as easy to bind up a new title-page as to use the old one. Often 
the date had to be changed : and we find that two of these pages bear 
the year 1667; four, 1668 ; and three, 1669. Seven have Milton's 
name in full ; two, only his initials. Mr Leigh Sotheby collated them 
carefully in his book on Milton's autograph, pp. 81 84. 



xlvi INTRODUCTION. 

this first edition an awkward arrangement changed in the 
second edition. Milton prefixed to the later copies the brief 
prefatory note on The Verse, explaining why he had used blank 
verse ; and it was preceded by the address of The Printer to the 
Reader. It seems that the number of copies printed in the first 
edition was 1500; and the statement of another payment made 
by the publisher to Milton on account of the sale of the book 
shows that by April 26, 1669, i.e. a year and a half after the date 
of publication, 1300 copies had been disposed of. 

In 1674 the second edition was issued with several changes. 
First, the epic (said to be 670 lines longer than the ^Eneid} 
was divided into twelve books, a more Vergilian number, by the 
subdivision of books VII. and X. Secondly, the prose Argu- 
ments were transferred from the beginning and prefixed to their 
respective books. Thirdly, a few changes were introduced into 
the text few of any great significance. It was to the second 
edition that the commendatory verses by Samuel Barrow and 
Andrew Marvell were prefixed. Four years later, 1678, came 
the third edition, and in 1688 the fourth. This last was the 
well-known folio published by Tonson ; Paradise Regained and 
Samson Agonistes were bound up with some copies of it, so that 
Milton's three great works were obtainable in a single volume. 
The first annotated edition of Paradise Lost was that edited by 
Patrick Hume in 1695, being the sixth reprint. And during 
the 1 8th century editions 1 were numerous. "Milton scholar- 
ship 2 ,'' it has been justly said, "was active throughout the whole 
period." 

There is, indeed, little (if any) ground for the view which one 
so frequently comes across that Paradise Lost met with scant 
appreciation, and that Milton was neglected by his contem- 

1 Pre-eminent among them is Bishop Newton's edition (1749). He 
was the first editor who took pains to secure accuracy of text, doing, 
on a smaller scale, for Milton what Theobald did for Shakespeare. 
His services too in the elucidation of certain aspects (notably the Scrip- 
tural) of Milton's learning have never been surpassed. 

2 See Professor Dowden's Tercentenary paper "Milton in the 
Eighteenth Century (1701 1750)." 



PARADISE LOST. xlvii 

poraries, and without honour in his lifetime. To the general 
public epic poetry will never appeal, more especially if it be 
steeped in the classical feeling that pervades Paradise Lost ; 
but there must have been a goodly number of scholars and 
lettered readers to welcome the work else why these successive 
editions, appearing at no very lengthy intervals? One thing, 
doubtless, which prejudiced its popularity was the personal 
resentment of the Royalist classes at Milton's political actions. 
They could not forget his long identification with republicanism ; 
and there was much in the poem itself covert sneers and 
gibes which would repel many who were loyal to the Church 
and the Court. Further, the style of Paradise Lost was 
something very different from the prevailing tone of the 
literature then current and popular. Milton was the last of the 
Elizabethans, a lonely survival lingering on into days when 
French influence was beginning to dominate English taste. 
Even the metre of his poem must have sounded strange to ears 
familiarised to the crisp clearness and epigrammatic ring of the 
rhymed couplet 1 . Yet, in spite of these obstacles, many whose 
praise was worth the having were proud of Milton : they felt 
that he had done honour to his country. He was accorded that 
which he had sought so earnestly acceptance as a great 
national poet ; and it is pleasant to read how men of letters 
and social distinction would pay visits of respect to him, and 
how the white-winged Fame bore his name and reputation 
abroad, so that foreigners came to England for the especial 
purpose of seeing him. And their visits were the prelude of 
that foreign renown and influence from which he seemed to 
have cut himself off when he made his native tongue the 
medium of his great work. " Milton was the first English 
poet to inspire respect and win fame for our literature on the 
Continent, and to his poetry was due, to an extent that has not 
yet been fully recognised, the change which came over European 
ideas in the eighteenth century with regard to the nature and 
scope of the epic. Paradise Lost was the mainstay of those 

1 Cf. Marvell's "Commendatory Verses," 45 54. 



xlviii INTRODUCTION. 

critics who dared to vindicate, in the face of French classicism, 
the rights of the imagination over the reason in poetry 1 ." 

There has been much discussion about the 'sources' of 
Paradise Lost, and writers well nigh as countless as Vallom- 
brosa's autumn leaves have been thrust forth from their 
obscurity to claim the honour of having 'inspired' (as the 
phrase is) the great epic. Most of these unconscious claimants 
were, like enough, unknown to Milton ; but some of them do 
seem to stand in a relation which demands recognition. 

I should place first the Latin tragedy Adamus Exul (1601), 
written in his youth by the great jurist Hugo Grotius after the 
model of Seneca. Apart from the question of actual resemblances 
to Paradise Lost, it might fairly be conjectured, if not assumed, 
that Milton read this tragedy. He knew Grotius personally and 
knew his works. Describing, in the Second Defence, his Italian 
tour in 1638, Milton mentions his stay in Paris and friendly 
reception by the English ambassador, and adds : " His lordship 
gave me a card of introduction to the learned Hugo Grotius, at 
that time ambassador from the Queen of Sweden to the French 
court; whose acquaintance I anxiously desired 2 ." He quotes the 
opinions of Grotius with high respect in his treatise on divorce 3 . 
The alternative titles of the fourth draft of Milton's own con- 
templated tragedy, viz. Adam unparadisfd and Adams Banish- 
ment, certainly recall the title Adamus Exul  and it may be 



1 Professor J. G. Robertson, ''Milton's Fame on the Continent," 
a paper read before the British Academy, Dec. 10, 1908. 

Perhaps the strangest and most delightful evidence of Milton's 
acceptance among foreigners was Mr Maurice Baring's discovery of the 
popularity of Paradise Lost, in a prose translation, amongst the Russian 
peasantry and private soldiers : 

" The schoolmaster said that after all his experience the taste of the 
peasants in literature baffled him. ' They will not read modern stories,' 
he said. 'When I ask them why they like Paradise Lost they point to 
their heart and say, "It is near to the heart ; it speaks; you read, and 
a sweetness comes to you." ' 

2 P. W. i. 255- 

3 See chapters XVII., XVHI. of The Doctrine and Discipline. 



PARADISE LOST. xlix 

noted that this draft was sketched in that period (about 1641) 
of Milton's life to which his meeting with Grotius belongs. 
Of the likeness between Paradise Lost and the Adarmts Exut, 
and other works dealing with the same theme, it is impossible to 
say how much, if not all, is due to identity of subject and (what 
is no less important) identity of convention as to the machinery 
proper for its treatment. But I do not think that community of 
subject accounts entirely for the resemblances between Paradise 
Lost and Grotius's tragedy. The conception of Satan's character 
and motives unfolded in his long introductory speech in the 
Adatmis, the general idea of his escaping from Hell and sur- 
veying Eden, his invocation of the powers of evil (amongst them 
Chaos and Night) these things and some others, such as the 
Angel's narrative to Adam of the Creation, seem like far-off 
embryonic drawings of the splendours of the epic. It should be 
added that Grotius's other religious plays were known in England. 
A free rendering of his Christus Pattens into rhymed heroics 
was published in London in 1640 under the title Christ's Passion; 
while his tragedy Sophompaneas^ or Joseph, appeared in an 
English version in 1650. And a sidelight may be thrown not 
merely on the contemporary estimate of Grotius by the ex- 
ceptionally eulogistic mention of his works in the Theatrum 
Poetarum (1675) of Milton's nephew Edward Phillips. The 
Theatrum is commonly supposed to reflect in some degree 
Milton's own views 1 and it is significant therefore to find 
Grotius described as one "whose equal in fame for Wit & 
Learning, Christendom of late Ages hath rarely produc'd, 
particularly of so happy a Genius in Poetry, that had his Annals, 

1 See v. 177, 673, notes. Other touches in the Theatrum of 
Mil tonic interest are the accounts of Spenser and Sylvester, and the 
praise of Henry Lawes in the notice of Waller. One may conjecture, 
too, that the obscure Erycus Puteanus would not have had his niche 
but for Comus. The Theatrum includes also Andreini but not Vondel. 
Phillips's account of Milton himself is admirably discreet : and he 
expressly terms Paradise Lost and Paradise Regained " Heroic Poems." 
The relations between uncle and nephew were more than ordinarily 
close. 



INTRODUCTION. 

his Book De Veritate Christiana Religionis...&K& other his 
extolled works in Prose, never come to Light, his extant and 
universally approved Latin Poems, had been sufficient to gain 
him a Living Name." 

It is an easy transition from the Adamus Exulto the Adamo 
of the Italian poet Giovanni Battista Andreini (15781652), a 
Florentine, which is said to owe something to Grotius's tragedy. 
Voltaire, in his Essai s ur la Podsie Epique written in 1727, related 
that Milton during his residence at Florence saw "a comedy 

called Adamo^ The subject of the play was the Fall of Man: 

the actors, the Devils, the Angels, Adam, Eve, the Serpent, 

Death, and the Seven Mortal Sins Milton pierced through 

the absurdity of that performance to the hidden majesty of the 
subject ; which, being altogether unfit for the stage, yet might be, 
for the genius of Milton, and his only, the foundation of an epick 
poem." What authority he had for this legend Voltaire does not 
say. It is not alluded to by any of Milton's contemporary bio- 
graphers. It may have been a mere invention by some ill-wisher 
of the poet, a piece of malicious gossip circulated out of political 
spite against the great champion of republicanism. But the 
authenticity of the story is not perhaps very important, for inde- 
pendently there seems to be evidence in the Adamo itself that 
Milton was acquainted with it even before his visit to Italy. One 
cannot read the scene of the Adamo (v. 5) in which the World, 
personified, tempts Eve with all its pomps and vanities, without 
being reminded of the scene in Comus of the temptation of the 
Lady. And, as with the Adamus Exul, some of the coincidences 
of incident and treatment between the Adamo and Paradise 
Lost, or Milton's early dramatic sketches of the action, seem to 
constitute a residuum of resemblance after full allowance has 

1 It had been printed in 1613 (Milan), and again in 1617. The 
title-page of the first edition describes the work as " L' Adamo, Sacra 
Rapresentatione." It is more " a hybrid between a miracle play and an 
opera" (Courthope) than a "comedy." A translation by Cowper and 
Hayley was printed in their edition of Milton ; and it is in this 
translation that the work is known to me. The fact that Cowper took 
the Adamo theory seriously is significant. 



PARADISE LOST. li 

been made for the influence of practical identity of theme. 
Thus the list of characters in the Adamo has abstractions like 
the World, Famine, Labour, Despair, Death : and the ap- 
pearance of these and kindred evils of life to Adam and Eve 
(Act iv., scenes 6 and 7) recalls the early drafts of the scheme of 
Paradise Lost and also the vision shown to Adam in the 
eleventh (477 99) book of the poem. Andreini makes Michael 
drive Adam and Eve out of Paradise and depicts a final struggle 
between Michael and Lucifer. Andreini's representation of the 
Serpent's temptation of Eve has been thought to have left some 
impression on the parallel scene in Paradise Lost. After the 
Fall Lucifer summons the spirits of air and fire, earth and water 
a counterpart to Paradise Regained, II. 115 et seq. And occasion- 
ally a verbal similarity arrests as where Lucifer says (iv. 2, end) 

" Let us remain in hell ! 
Since there is more content 
To live in liberty, tho' all condemn'd, 
Than, as his vassals, blest 1 " 

(" Pot, ch? I maggior contento 
viver in liberta tutti dainnati^ 
che sudditi foafi"); 
and inveighs (iv. 2) : 

" Ahi luce, ahi luce odiata ! " 
or where the Angels describe Man (n. i) : 

"For contemplation of his Maker form'd 71 
("Per contemplar del suo gran Fabro il merto"}. 

1 See I. 263, note ; but of course the idea was not peculiar to any 
writer. So tradition, literary or theological, may explain the following 
similarity, which is at least an interesting illustration of P. L. v. 688, 
699. Andreini makes Lucifer (i. 3) address his followers : 
"I am that Spirit, I, who for your sake 
Collecting dauntless courage, to the north 
Led you far distant from the senseless will 
Of him who boasts to have created heav'n." 
The reference occurs again in the Adamo, in. 8. 
Tradition also may account for another feature common to the 
Adamo, the Adatmts and Paradise Lost, viz. the long description of the 
convulsions and deterioration in the physical universe after the Fall of 
Man. 



Hi INTRODUCTION. 

Leaving the matter for a moment we will pass to the third 
claimant, the Dutch poet, Joost van den Vondel. He was 
contemporary with Milton, and the author of a great number of 
works. Among them were several dramas on Scriptural subjects. 
With three of them Milton is supposed by some writers to have 
been acquainted. These are Lucifer (1654), a drama on the 
revolt of the angels and their fall from heaven ; John the Messenger 
(1662), and Adam in Banishment (1664). In a work published 
a few years since it was contended that Milton borrowed a good 
deal from these three poems. 

That Milton had heard of Vondel may be conceded. 
Vondel enjoyed a great reputation ; beside which, there was 
in the I7th century much intercourse between England and 
Holland, and Milton from his position as Secretary, no less 
than from his controversies with Salmasius and Morus, must 
have had his thoughts constantly directed towards the Nether- 
lands. Also, we learn that he had some knowledge of the Dutch 
language. But it will be observed that the earliest of the poems 
with which he is thought to have been too conversant, namely 
Lucifer, was not published till after his blindness, while by the 
time that the last of them, Adam in Banishment, appeared, 
Paradise Lost was almost completed. It is impossible that 
Milton read a line of the works himself ; if he knew them at all, 
it must have been through the assistance of some reader or 
translator; and considering how many details concerning the 
last years of Milton's life have survived, it is exceeding curious 
that this reader or translator should have escaped mention, and 
that the Vondelian theory should not have been heard of till a 
century after the poet's death. For there were plenty of people 
ready to do him an ill-turn and damage his repute ; and 
plagiarism from his Dutch contemporary would have been 
an excellent cry to raise. As it is, Milton's biographers and 
contemporaries Phillips, Aubrey, Toland, Antony a Wood, 
are absolutely silent on the subject. Phillips indeed and 
Toland expressly mention the languages in which Milton used 
to have works read to him. The list is extensive : it includes 
Hebrew, Syriac, Greek, Latin, Italian, Spanish and French : 



PARADISE LOST. liii 

and it does not include Dutch. I think that this fact tells 
heavily against the hypothesis of Milton's indebtedness to 
Vondel. Still, it must be admitted that critics of eminence 
accept it. 

There remains the so-called Caedmon Paraphrase. In the 
Bodleian is the manuscript of an Old English metrical Para- 
phrase of parts 1 of the Old Testament. This work was long 
attributed to the Northumbrian religious writer Casdmon, of 
whom Bede speaks. Caedmon lived in the seventh century. 
He is supposed to have died about 670. There is no reason for 
thinking that he was not the author of sacred poems, as Bede 
represents him to have been ; but there is also no possibility of 
believing that the Paraphrase, as we have it, was written by 
him. It is a composite work in which several hands may be 
traced, and the different styles belong to a date long subsequent 
to Casdmon 2 . The MS. was once in the possession of Archbishop 
Ussher. He presented it in 1651 to his secretary, the Teutonic 
scholar, Francis Dujon, commonly called Franciscus Junius. 
Junius published the MS. at Amsterdam in 1655. Milton never 
saw the Paraphrase in print, for the same reason that he never 
saw Vondel's Lucifer. But inasmuch as Junius had been settled 
in England since 1620, it is quite likely that he knew Milton 3 ; 
if so, he may have mentioned the Paraphrase, and even 
translated* parts of it. Here, however, as in the previous cases 
of Andreini and Vondel, we cannot get beyond conjecture, 

1 Namely Genesis, Exodus and Daniel. It is the paraphrase of 
Genesis that would have concerned Milton most. 

2 See the article by Mr Henry Bradley in the Dictionary of National 
Biography. There is also a good discussion of the authorship of the 
work in the Appendix to Professor Ten Brink's Early English Lite- 
rature. 

3 This was first pointed out by Sharon Turner; see also Masson, 
Life, vi. 557. 

4 In a very ingenious paper in Anglia, iv. pp. 401 405, Professor 
Wuelcker argues that Milton had not much knowledge of Anglo-Saxon. 
In his History of Britain he habitually quotes Latin Chronicles, and 
in one place virtually admits that an Old English chronicle was not 
intelligible to him. 



liv INTRODUCTION. 

since there is no actual record or external evidence of Milton's 
acquaintance with the Paraphrase or its translator. 

These then are the four possible ' sources ' of Paradise Lost 
seemingly most deserving of mention ; and of them the Adamus 
Exul and the Adamo strike me as unquestionably the most 
important, for various reasons. Milton's acquaintance with them 
may be referred to the early period when the influence on him 
of other writers would be greatest. The Adamus and the Adamo 
both present some points of resemblance to the early drafts of 
Paradise Lost. With the Adamus there is the special con- 
sideration of Milton's personal knowledge and admiration of 
its author. With the Adamo^ apart from the possibility that 
Voltaire's story had some basis, there is the consideration of 
Milton's special devotion to Italian literature. With neither is 
there, at least not in the same degree as in the case of Vondel's 
works and the Csedmon Paraphrase, the difficulty involved by 
the poet's blindness. That he knew the Adamus^ and the Adamo 
appears to me, now, hardly an open question. In these and 
similar works disinterred by the industry of Milton's editors lay 
the general conception, the theological machinery, the cosmic 
and supra-cosmic scene of a poem on the Fall of Man. So 
much is simply a matter of history ; and to claim for Milton or 
any other writer who chose this theme the merit of absolute 
originality is simply to ignore history. The composition of 
religious poetry was the great literary activity of the earlier part 
of the 1 7th century, and Milton did on the grand scale what others 
did on the lower. The work of these lesser writers could not be 
without its influence on him, since no poet can detach himself from 
the conditions of his age or the associations of a subject that 
has become common property and passed into a convention. 
But that the qualities which have made Paradise Lost 
immortal were due, in the faintest degree, to any other genius 

1 As regards the Adamus Exul William Lauder had some case, but 
spoilt it by his forgeries ; for a sample of his libellous malevolence see i. 
7 6!_6 3j note. Todd (n. 585 89) has an Appendix on " Lauder 's 
Interpolations." 



PARADISE LOST. lv 

than that of Milton himself: this is a fond delusion, vainly 
imagined, without warranty, and altogether to be cast out. 

We must indeed recognise in Paradise Lost, the meeting- 
point of Renaissance and Reformation, the impress of four 
great influences : the Bible, the classics, the Italian poets, 
and English literature. Of the Bible Milton possessed a 
knowledge such as few have had. There are hundreds of 
allusions to it : the words of Scripture underlie some part of the 
text of every page of Paradise Lost ; and apart from verbal 
reminiscences there is much of the spirit that pervades that 
noblest achievement of the English tongue. Scarcely less 
powerful was the influence of the classics. Milton's allusiveness 
extends over the whole empire of classical humanity and letters, 
and to the scholar his work is full of the exquisite charm of 
endless reference to the noblest things that the ancients have 
thought and said. That he was deeply versed in Italian poetry 
the labours of his early editors have abundantly proved ; and 
their comparative studies are confirmed by the frequent mention 
of Dante 1 , Petrarch, Tasso, Ariosto and others in his prose works 
and correspondence. In English literature I imagine that he 
had read everything worth reading. Without doubt, he was 

1 See Dr Paget Toynbee's Dante in English Literature, I. 2, 120, 
486, II. 587. Among the points noted are these : Dante resemblances 
occur in Milton's early poems before his visit to Italy ; in his Common- 
place Book Milton illustrates his views several times by references to 
Dante ; his rendering of three lines of the Inferno in his treatise Of 
Reformation (see P. L. III. 444 97, note) is the first instance of the use 
of blank verse as a medium for the translation of Dante and may have 
suggested the use of that metre to Gary ; Milton was one of the first 
English poets to use Dante's terza rima see his translation of Psalm ii., 
headed " Done August 8, 1653. Terzetri." Dr Toynbee also states that 
Milton's copy (the 3rd ed., Venice, 1529) of the Convivio is extant: 
" Milton has written his name in the book and the date, 1629. The 
volume belonged to Heber [the book-collector, half-brother of the 
bishop], and was sold at his sale in 1834." It contained also the 
Sonnets (1563) of the Italian poet Casa and the marginal markings, 
if made by Milton, show that he had " read the Sonnets with great 
attention." 



Ivi INTRODUCTION. 

most affected by "our admired Spenser 1 ." He was, says 
Dryden, "the poetical son of Spenser. Milton has acknow- 
ledged to me that Spenser was his original." And there was a 
Spenserian school of poets, mostly Cambridge men, and some 
of them contemporary with Milton at the University, with 
whose works he evidently had a considerable acquaintance. 
Among these the two Fletchers were conspicuous Giles 
Fletcher, author of the sacred poems Chrisfs Victorie on Earth 
and Chrtsfs Triumph in Heaven ; and Phineas Fletcher, 
author of The Purple Island. The influence of the Fletchers 
is manifest in Milton's early poems 2 , and it is traceable in 
Paradise Lost. Finally, we must not forget Sylvester. Joshua 
Sylvester (of whom little is known beyond that he was born in 
1563, died in 1618, and diversified the profession of merchant 
with the making of much rhyme) translated into exceedingly 
Spenserian verse The Divine Weeks and Works of the French 
poet, Du Bartas 3 . The subject of this very lengthy work is the 
story of Creation, with the early history of the Jews. The 
translation was amazingly popular. Dryden confessed that he 
had once preferred Sylvester to Spenser 4 . There is no doubt 

1 Animadversions, P. W. in. 84. On Milton's feeling for Spenser 
see the note to  Penseroso, 1 16 20. 

3 See the Introductions to Comus and Lycidas. Phineas Fletcher's 
Apollyonists might also be mentioned (see u. 650, 746, notes). Besides 
the Fletchers, there was Henry More, the famous " Cambridge 
Platonist." Milton must have known him at Christ's College. 

3 Sylvester translated a good deal from Du Bartas beside the Divine 
Weeks ; and rhymed on his own account. The first collected edition of 
his translation of the Divine Weeks was published in 16051606, 
instalments having appeared between 1592 and 1599. Dr Grosart 
collected Sylvester's works into two bulky volumes. 

4 Spenser himself admired Du Bartas greatly; see the Envoy 
addressed to the French poet Bellay at the end of The Ruines of Rome. 

In a paper read before the British Academy on some MS. notes, 
"dealing mainly with the place of astronomy in poetry," by Spenser's 
Cambridge friend Gabriel Harvey, Professor Gollancz gave the following 
extract referring to Du Bartas and Spenser : 

"Mr Digges hath the whole Aquarius of Palingenius by heart, 



PARADISE LOST. Ivii 

that Milton studied The Divine Weeks in his youth. " That Poem 
hath ever had many great admirers among us " is the suggestive 
comment of his nephew Edward Phillips. It is certainly one 
of the works 1 whereof account must be taken in any attempt to 
estimate the literary influences that moulded Milton's style. 

But a writer may be influenced by others, and not 'pla- 
giarise'; and it is well to remember that from Vergil downwards 
the great poets have exercised their royal right of adapting the 
words of their forerunners and infusing into them a fresh charm 
and suggestion, since in allusion lies one of the chief delights of 
literature. It is well, also, to realise wherein lies the greatness 
of Paradise Lost, and to understand that all the borrowing in 
the world could not contribute a jot to the qualities which have 
rendered the epic " a possession for ever." What has made the 
poem live is not the story, nobly though that illustrates the 
eternal antagonism of righteousness and wrong, and the over- 
throw of evil ; nor the construction, though this is sufficiently 
architectonic ; nor the learning, though this is vast ; nor the 
characterisation, for which there is little scope : not these things, 
though all are factors in the greatness of the poem, and in all 
Milton rises to the height of his argument but the incom- 
parable elevation of the style, " the shaping spirit of Imagina- 
tion, " and the mere majesty of the music. 

and takes much delight to repeat it often. Mr Spenser conceives the 
like pleasure in the fourth day of the first Week of Bartas which he 
esteems as the proper profession of Urania." 

1 See some remarks and illustrations in Professor Mackail's The 
Springs of Helicon (1909), pp. 195, 196. 



P. L. 



Iviii INTRODUCTION. 



 



THE STORY OF THE POEM. 



A sketch of the action of the whole poem, following the 
sequence of the twelve books, may be useful to those who are 
acquainted only with parts of Paradise Lost : 

I. The scene Hell the time nine days after the expulsion 
of Satan and his followers from Heaven. They lie on the 
burning lake, stupefied. Satan first recovers, rouses Beelzebub, 
discusses with him their position, and then makes his way from 
the lake to a " dreary plain " of dry land. Beelzebub follows ; 
Satan calls to his comrades to do likewise. Rising on the wing 
they reach the same firm land. Their numbers and names 
described. They range themselves in battle-array before Satan, 
who addresses them. They may still (he says) regain Heaven ; 
or there may be other worlds to win in particular, a new world, 
inhabited by new-created beings, of which report had spoken : 
let these matters be duly conferred of. Straightway, a vast 
palace Pandemonium is made, to serve as council-chamber. 
Here a council is held ; only the great Angels are present. 

II. The scene at first Pandemonium ; the debate begins. 
Satan invites their counsel "who can advise may speak." 
Moloch, Belial and Mammon speak their several counsels : 
last Beelzebub, who reverts to Satan's hint of the new world. 
Why not ruin it ? or make it their own ? or win its inhabitants 
to their side? What better revenge against the Almighty? 
The plan approved but who will discover this world ? None 
volunteer : and then Satan offers to undertake the journey. 
His offer accepted; the council leaving Pandemonium breaks 
up ; the result announced to the rest of the Angels. How they 
pass the time till his return some exploring Hell (now more 
closely described). Meanwhile he reaches Hell-gates, is suffered 
to pass by Sin and Death, voyages through Chaos (described), 
and at last comes within sight of the Universe hung in space 
(i.e. Chaos). We leave him directing his course towards the 
World. 



PARADISE LOST. lix 

III. The scene at first Heaven. The Almighty perceives 
Satan, points him out to the Son, tells what his design is, and 
its destined success ; tells also that Man will be saved ultimately 
if he can find a Redeemer. " The Son of God freely offers 
himself a ransom for Man " ; is accepted by the Father, and 
praised by the Angelic host. Meanwhile the scene changing 
Satan, having reached the outer surface (described) of the 
Universe, wanders through various regions (described), until, 
coming to the single opening in the surface, he descends into 
the inside of the Universe. He arrives at the sphere of the 
Sun ; disguising himself as a young Angel from Heaven, en- 
quires from Uriel, the Sun-spirit, the way to Earth pretending 
" desire to behold the new Creation " ; is directed by Uriel, 
descends again, and alights on Mt Niphates. 

IV. There, pausing awhile, he gives way to regret that he 
has rebelled, and rage at his outcast state ; passion distorts his 
face, so that Uriel, watching, now knows him for an evil spirit. 
Thence, recovering self-control, Satan journeys on towards 
Eden, the main scene (described) ; sees Adam and Eve (famous 
description of them) ; overhears what they say concerning the 
Tree of Knowledge, and perceives at once the means whereby 
to compass their fall At nightfall he essays to tempt Eve in a 
dream ; is discovered by Gabriel, who, warned by Uriel, has 
descended to Eden to defend Man. A battle between Satan 
and Gabriel imminent, but averted. Satan flies. 

V The scene still Eden. A further picture of Adam and 
Eve their worship and work. Raphael (the scene having 
changed for a brief space to Heaven) comes to warn them of 
their danger, at the bidding of the Almighty so that Man, if he 
falls, may fall knowingly, by his own fault. Raphael received 
and entertained ; admonishes Adam ; explains who his enemy 
is, and why . which leads to an account of the rebellion in 
Heaven its beginning described. 

VI. The scene of the events narrated by Raphael Heaven. 
He describes the three days' war in Heaven, at the end of which 
Satan and his followers were cast into Hell. The warning to 
Adam repeated. 



x INTRODUCTION. 

VII. The scene Eden. Raphael describes the Creation of 
the World, which is accomplished by the Son of God. 

VIII. The scene the same. Adam enquires concerning 
the stars and Heavenly bodies ; Raphael answers doubtfully. 
Adam recounts his own first experience of Eden how the 
Almighty forbade him to touch the Tree of Knowledge, under 
pain of what penalty ; how he first saw Eve. The day declines, 
and Raphael departs once more warning Adam. 

IX. The scene the same. "Adam and Eve... go forth to 
their labours, which Eve proposes to divide in several places, 
each labouring apart." Adam dissuades ; she persisting, he 
yields. So Satan (in the form of a serpent) finds her alone and 
tempts her. She eats of the fruit and induces Adam to do so. 
Their sense of sin and shame. 

X. The Son of God descends to Eden, and pronounces 
doom on Adam and Eve and the Serpent. Meanwhile Satan, 
returning to Pandemonium, announces the result of his journey, 
and lo ! on a sudden he and his followers are changed to reptiles. 
Sin and Death now ascend from Hell to Eden, to claim the 
World as theirs ; but the Almighty foretells their ultimate over- 
throw by the Son, and commands the Angels to make changes 
in the elements and stars, whereby the Earth becomes less fair. 
The repentance of Adam and Eve, who seek comfort in suppli- 
cation of the Deity. The scene has changed often. 

XI. The Son interceding, the Father sends Michael to 
Eden (henceforth the scene) to reveal the future to Adam 
above all, his hope of redemption. After announcing to Adam 
his approaching banishment from Eden, Michael takes him to a 
high mountain and unrolls before him a vision of the World's 
history till the Flood. 

XII. Then he traces the history of Israel after the Flood, 
till the coming of Christ, with the subsequent progress of Chris- 
tianity : ending with renewed promise of redemption. The fiery 
Cherubim now descend. Michael leads Adam and Eve to the 
gates of Eden ; and they go forth, sad yet consoled with the 
hope of salvation at the last. 






PARADISE LOST. Ixi 



MILTON'S PREFACE ON "THE VERSE "OF 
PARADISE LOST. 

Milton's attitude towards rhyme reminds us of the condem- 
nations showered on it by Elizabethan critics. Ascham in the 
Schoolmaster (1570) sneers at "our rude beggerly ryming, brought 
first into Italic by Gothes and Hunnes, whan all good verses 
and all good learning to, were destroyed by them... and at last 
receyued into England by men of excellent wit indeede, but of 
small learning, and lesse judgement in that behalfe." "Barba- 
rous " is his darling epithet for rhymed verse. Puttenham is of 
a like mind, waving aside " the rhyming poesie of the barbarians,'"' 
and Webbe in his Discourse of English Poetry (1586) takes up 
the tale, ridiculing it as " tinkerly verse " " brutish poesie " 
" a great decay of the good order of versifying." Why Milton 
should have adopted the same position as these Elizabethan 
critics who approached the question in a spirit of the merest 
pedantry, and based their objections to rhyme solely on the 
fact that, as a metrical principle, it was not employed by the 
ancients, it is not easy to say. He uses rhyme occasionally in 
Samson Agonistes, in spite of his denunciation of it here ; and 
his own early poems are sufficient refutation of the heresy that 
therein lies " no true musical delight." Moreover, though he 
appeals to the example of some European poets " 01 prime 
note" in support of his view, yet he must have foreseen the 
obvious and just retort that the weight of " custom " was against 
him, and that, in particular, the Italian exponents 01 versi 
sciolti whom he could cite on his side made a poor showing 
beside those great masters of rhyme Dante, Ariosto, Tasso 1 
to whom he himself owed so much. His contemptuous dis- 
missal of what " in every country of modern Europe had been 
adopted as the basis of metrical composition 2 " was ^character- 
istic touch of his resentment of criticism and defiance of 
authority. 

1 See, however, p. 367. 

2 Courthope. 



Ixii INTRODUCTION. 

There is a polemical tone in his remarks, as though he were 
replying to some unnamed antagonist ; and I cannot help 
thinking that this preface was meant to be his contribution to 
the controversy then raging over the comparative advantages of 
rhymed and unrhymed metres on the stage. In fact, significant 
in itself, Milton's opinion becomes doubly so if regarded from 
the standpoint of his contemporaries. Hardly could they fail to 
see in it a retort to what Dryden had written in the behalf of 
rhyme notably in his Essay of Dramatic Poesy (1665), in 
which the rhymed couplet had been set forth as the best vehicle 
of dramatic expression. In play after play Dryden had put his 
theory into practice : others had followed his example : to 
rhyme or not to rhyme that had become the great question; 
and here was Milton brushing the matter on one side as of no 
moment, with the autocratic dictum that rhyme was a vain and 
fond thing with which a " sage and serious " poet need have no 
commerce. His readers must have detected the contemporary 
application of his words just as later on they must have 
interpreted his preface to Samson Agonistes, with its pointed 
eulogy of the Greek stage and its depreciation of Restoration 
tragedy (and "other common interludes"), as a counterblast to 
the comparison which Dryden had drawn between the modern 
and the classical drama, in the interests of the former. There 
is force too in the suggestion that the association of rhyme 
with the amatory Caroline poets (Lycidas, 67 69) would not 
make Milton more favourable to it. 

Curiously enough, Paradise Lost and Paradise Regained)Qh 
contain a good deal of rhyme. We may compare it with the rare 
rhymed verse, accidental or designed (" leonine "), in the Latin 
poets. Cowper noted some instances in his fragment of a com- 
mentary on Paradise Lost. " Rhyme," he said, " is apt to come 
uncalled, and to writers of blank verse is often extremely trouble- 
some 1 .''' Indeed complete absence of rhyme argues some artifici- 
ality. To quote Mr Robert Bridges: "Rhyme occurs in. Paradise 

1 "The blank verse Italians have often done this [i.e. rhymed] : in 
fact, it is excessively difficult to prevent in Italian " (Saintsbury). 



PARADISE LOST. Ixiii 

L0st(see l. 146, 8, 51; II. 220, i; IV. 2427), but only as a natural 
richness among the varieties of speech ; and it would seem that 
it cannot be forbidden in a long poem but by the scrupulosity 
which betrays art." Possibly, however, the amount of rhyme 
in the two epics exceeds what Milton would have desired. It 
illustrates, I think, the terrible difficulty of revision imposed by 
his blindness. Yet such is the spell of the rhythm of his verse 
that one may be unconscious of the rhyme till its presence 
is pointed out. Of consecutive rhymed lines, some being actual 
rhymed couplets, the following passages are examples : Paradise 
Lost, ii. 220, 221 ; iv. 956, 957 ; vi. 709, 710 ; ix. 105, 106, 477, 
478; XI. 230, 231, 597, 598, 671, 672; Paradise Regained, in. 214, 
215; IV. 591, 592. In ii. 893, 894, a slight difference of pronun- 
ciation, indicated by Milton's spelling, may account for what 
appears to the eye as a couplet. In v. 167, 168, 274, 275, 
IX. 191, 192, the assonance has the effect of rhyme. Of course, 
the most frequent rhyme is that which comes with an interval of 
one or two intervening lines, as in two out of the three passages 
remarked by Mr Bridges. Other examples 1 are: Paradise Lost, 
I. 274, 276, 711,7135 764, 767; II. 390, 393, 942, 9445 ni. 140, 142, 

l68, 170; IV. 222, 224, 288, 290, 678, 680; V. 1 60, 162, 383, 385, 

857, 859; vi. 14, 1 6, 161, 163, 174, 176; viii. i, 3, 171, 173, 229, 

231; IX. 590, 591, 606, 608; XL 201, 204, 206, 637, 639, 740, 741; 

XIL 353, 355> 366, 368; Paradise Regained, II. 206, 208, 245, 247, 
250; IV. 25, 27, 145, 147, 222, 224. As remarked before, I cannot 
help thinking that a portion of this rhyme represents Milton's 
inability to focus the full measure of his fastidious taste 2 on the 
revision of his work. 

Superfluous as it may seem to us that he should justify his 
adoption of blank verse wherein his surpassing skill is the 
best of all justifications we have cause to be grateful to the 
"stumblings" of the unlettered which led him to write this 

1 The list is illustrative, not exhaustive. 

2 It would have resented surely the substitution of Chersonese in 
most modern texts for the Chersoness of the original editions in 
Paradise Regained, iv. 74. See the termination of the previous line. 



Ixiv INTRODUCTION. 

preface, since it happily defines the qualities for which the metre 
of Paradise Lost is remarkable. 

The distinguishing characteristic of Milton's blank verse is 
his use of what Mr Saintsbury calls the verse-paragraph. 
Blank verse is exposed to two dangers : it may be formal and 
stiff by being circumscribed in single lines or couplets; or 
diffuse and formless through the sense and rhythm being carried 
on beyond the couplet. In its earlier stages, exemplified by 
works like Gorboduc, the metre suffered from the former 
tendency. It either closed with a strong pause at the end of 
every line, or just struggled to the climax of the couplet. 
Further it never extended until Marlowe took the " drumming 
decasyllabon " into his hands, broke up the fetters of the 
couplet-form, and by the process of overflow carried on the 
rhythm from verse to verse according as the sense required. 
It is in his plays that we first get verse in which variety of 
cadence and pause and beat takes the place of rhyme. Milton 
entered on the heritage that Marlowe and Shakespeare be- 
queathed, and brought blank verse to its highest pitch of 
perfection as an instrument of narration. 

Briefly, that perfection lies herein : if we examine a page of 
Paradise Lost we find that what the poet has to say is, for the 
most part, conveyed, not in single lines, nor in rigid couplets 
but in flexible combinations of verses, which wait upon his 
meaning, not twisting or constraining the sense, but suffering it 
to be " variously drawn out," so that the thought is merged in 
its expression. 

These combinations, or paragraphs, are informed by a 
perfect internal concent and rhythm 1 held together by a chain 
of harmony With a writer less sensitive to sound this free 
method of versifying would result in mere chaos. But Milton's 
ear is so delicate, that he steers unfaltering through the long, 
involved passages, distributing the pauses and rests and allitera- 

1 Cf. Professor Mackail's fine metaphor for it "the planetary 
wheeling of the long period " " that continuous planetary movement" 
(Lecture II. on Milton in The Springs of Helicon, pp. 156, 196). 






PARADISE LOST. Ixv 

tive balance with a cunning which knits the paragraph into a 
coherent, regulated whole. He combines, in fact, the two es- 
sential qualities of blank verse freedom and form : the freedom 
that admits variety of effect, without which a long narrative 
becomes intolerably monotonous ; and the form which saves an 
unrhymed measure from drifting into that which is nearer to 
bad prose than to good verse. And restoration of form was 
precisely what the metre needed. With the later Jacobean and 
Caroline dramatists metrical freedom had turned to "licence 
and slipshodness...then comes Milton,... takes non-dramatic 
blank verse in hand once for all, and introduces into it the 
order, proportion, and finish which dramatic blank verse had 
then lost 1 ." Milton in fact was the re-creator of blank verse, 
" the first to establish this peculiarly English form of metre in 
non-dramatic poetry 1 ." Nor was he unconscious of the character 
of his achievement. Here, in the last lines of his preface, he 
congratulates himself upon "an example set"; and many years 
before, in the grand passage apostrophising the Divine Goodness 
at the end of the treatise Of Reformation, he had written, with 
obvious reference to the great design that ruled his whole life : 
" Then, amidst the hymns and hallelujahs of saints, some one 
may perhaps be heard offering at high strains in new and 
lofty measure to sing and celebrate thy divine mercies and 
marvellous judgments in this land throughout all ages 2 ." It 
were hard to frame an apter summary of the metre of Paradise 
Lost than "-new and lofty." 

As he lays such stress upon the internal economy and 
balance of his verse-paragraphs, much must depend on the 
pause or rest which in English prosody answers, to some extent, 
to the classical ccesura. Dr Masson notes that Milton's favourite 
pause is at the end of the third foot. These are typical 
specimens : 

"I, at first, with two fair gifts 
Created him endowed | with happiness 

1 Saintsbury, History of English Prosody, n. pp. 208, 224. 

2 P. W. ii. 418. 



Ixvi INTRODUCTION. 

And immortality; | that fondly lost, 
This other served but to eternize woe, 
Till I provided death : | so death becomes 
His final remedy" | (xi. 57 62). 

Next in frequency comes the pause after the second foot; cf. 

"ere fallen 
From innocence " | (xi. 29, 30). 

" Made one with me, | as I with thee am one " (xi. 44). 

Scarcely need we say that in this, as in everything else, 
Milton never forgets that variety of effect is essential. 

It remains to note two other remarks made by Milton. 
One of the elements, he says, of "true musical delight" is 
"fit quantity of syllables." By this, I think, he meant that 
every word should bear its natural accent, i.e. that a word 
should not be forced by the exigence of the metre to bear 
an accent alien to it. Rather, a poet should be careful to 
"span words with just note and accent 1 ," so that each stress 
should fall naturally, and the " fit quantity " of the component 
parts of a line not be violated. Considering the length of 
Paradise Lost, it is marvellous how he maintains an unfaltering 
appropriateness of accent. But another interpretation of his 
words is possible, namely that by " fit quantity of syllables " he 
meant "that blank verse might be extended beyond the usual 
number of ten syllables when its sense and feeling so required 2 ." 
Taken in this way, "quantity" would have reference to the 
trisyllabic element in his verse by which the number of syllables 
in a line is increased, and perhaps more obviously to the 
hypermetrical element. 

One peculiarity of the metre of Paradise Lost, pointed out 
by Coleridge, is the rarity of verses with an extra syllable (or 
two extra syllables) at the close. Shakespeare, of course, uses 

1 Sonnet to Henry Lawes. 

2 Courthope, History of English Poetry, III. 428. Personally I 
think that in a specifically metrical context " quantity " conveys the 
notion "long" or "short," i.e. with or without accent (stress). 



PARADISE LOST. Ixvii 

them freely especially in his later plays, and the percentage of 
them in Comus and Samson Agonistes is high. But in Paradise 
Lost Milton avoids them. There are several varieties of this 
extra-syllable verse e.g. lines (i) where the supernumerary 
syllable comes at the close ; (ii) where it comes in the course 
of the line, particularly after the second foot ; (iii) where there 
are two extra syllables at the end, as in the line, "Like one j that 
means | his projper harm, | in ?s&.nacles" (Coriolanus, I. 9. 57) ; 
and (iv) where there are two extra syllables in the middle, as in 
Coriolanus, I. i. 230, "Our must|y su|perfluzy |. See our | best 
elders." In Comus there are examples of all four varieties : in 
Paradise Lost of only two 1 (i) and (iii). This paucity is an 
illustration of what must be recognised as. the great metrical 
feature of the epic that its metre is mainly iambic, and conse- 
quently decasyllabic in character. Such verse has a slower, 
statelier movement, and is therefore appropriate to a narrative 
poem that deals with the loftiest themes in an elevated, solemn 
style. Verse, on the other hand, that admits the supernumerary 
syllable at the close of the line tends towards a conversational 
rapidity of rhythm which makes it suitable for the purposes of 
the dramatist. It is typical of Milton's "inevitable," almost 
infallible, art that he should vary his style so precisely to fit the 
several characteristics and requirements of the drama and of 
epic narration. Such variation illustrates "a quality for which 
he seldom or never gets the full credit due to him, a dramatic 
sense of extreme delicacy. With him, as with Sophocles, this 
quality is so fine that it may easily elude observation 2 ." 

Again, another element of the pleasure offered by poetry 
lies in "apt numbers." Here Milton referred to that adaptation 
of expression to subject whereby the sound becomes an echo to 
the sense. This adaptation is shown in its simplest form by the 

1 In most of the cases of one extra syllable it ,is a present participle 
that is affected. I believe that the cases with two such syllables are 
in Milton confined to words like society ; cf. P. R. I. 302, " Such 
solitude before choicest socutfy." So in P. L. vill. 216. Of course in 
these cases an " Alexandrine " solves the difficulty. 

2 The Springs of Helicon, p. 175 (see also p. 178). 



Ixviii INTRODUCTION. 

suggestion of specific effects such as movement or sound 1 . 
But it dominates the whole relation of the manner to the matter. 
No one has understood the art of blending the thought with 
its expression better than Milton. " What other poets effect,' 3 
says Dr Guest 2 , "as it were by chance, Milton achieved by the 
aid of science and art ; he studied the aptness of his numbers, 
and diligently tutored an ear which nature had gifted with the 
most delicate sensibility. In the flow of his rhythm, in the 
quality of his letter sounds, in the disposition of his pauses, his 
verse almost ever fits the subject, and so insensibly does 
poetry blend with this the last beauty of exquisite versifica- 
tion that the reader may sometimes doubt whether it be the 
thought itself, or merely the happiness of its expression, which 
is the source of a gratification so deeply felt." 

We have seen that Milton may have had in view the scan- 
sion of his verse when he referred to the "fit quantity of syllables." 
That scansion has as its basic principle the "pure iambic" 
carmen iambicum so much canvassed by Elizabethan metricists. 
This stately, self-contained line of five feet in rising rhythm 
"O Prince, O chief of many throned powers " lies at the centre 
of the prosody of Paradise Lost. So much is patent; nor are the 
main means by which it is varied obscure. By letting the lines 
run on so that the rhythm of the unit of five feet passes into the 
richer harmony of groups of units Milton gives us the "verse- 
paragraph." And by substituting each of the possible variations 
of the disyllabic foot namely, the trochee (or inversion of 
rhythm), the spondee and the pyrrhic he tempers the monotony 
of a single-foot measure to " stops of various quills." But these 
foot-modifications had become part of the machinery of blank 

1 Cf. e.g. i. 742 46, 768, ii. 947 50, 1021, 1022, vii. 495 (note), 
X. 521 28 (note). So in II. 641 we get the sense of vast space; in n. 
879 83 of combined movement and jarring noise ; in n. 890 906 of 
confusion; iniv. i8i(note) of scornful laughter; in vii. 480 of length. 
A very elaborate example (admirably analysed in Mayor's Modern 
English Metre, pp. 99 106) is the description of the march of the fallen 
angels in I. 549 62. 

2 English Rhythms, p. 530. 



PARADISE LOST. Ixix 

verse as developed since the pioneer days. There is nothing 
specifically Miltonic about the use of them in Paradise Lost, 
except possibly as regards the spondee. Cowper was in- 
clined to think that " the grand secret to which his [Milton's] 
verse is principally indebted for its stately movement " is the 
frequent employment of spondaic feet : " the more long syllables 
there are in a verse, the more the line of it is protracted, and 
consequently the pace, with which it moves, is the more majestic." 
That Milton's use of the trochee (or rare double trochee) was 
due to the partiality of the Italians for this foot seems a needless 
assumption, the trochee having been firmly established by 
Marlowe. And "pyrrhic" is merely a rather pedantic-sounding 
term for a quite ordinary feature of blank verse namely, the 
occurrence of a foot with a weak stress. Dr Abbott estimates 
that of Shakespeare's lines " rather less than one of three has 
the full number of five emphatic accents." I doubt whether the 
instances are so frequent in Milton; but they are sufficiently 
common to make it desirable to remember that five stresses are 
not indispensable rather that for variety's sake it is necessary 
that one or more should occasionally be remitted. Taken as a 
whole, the obviously disyllabic element of Milton's poetry does 
not present much difficulty : the crux lies in the less obviously 
trisyllabic strata. 

This is a subject on which irreconcilable opinions are held ; 
the Miltonic blank verse described by Dr Masson is simply a 
different thing from the Miltonic blank verse described by Mr 
Bridges ; and the essential truth seems to me to lie very much 
nearer to the views of the latter critic. I think that Milton 
himself would have been astonished at the elaborate trisyllabic 
apparatus bacchics and amphibrachs and cretics rare with 
which the verse of Paradise Lost has been credited. The base- 
principle of the slow-moving, majestic iambic decasyllabic is 
lost in the mazes of so complex a system. On the other hand, 
to attempt to ban the trisyllabic foot altogether from his metre 
involves impossible twistings and distortions. We shall not be 
far astray if we steer a middle course and admit the anapaest 



Ixx INTRODUCTION. 

(" the foot-of-all-work of English prosody ") and (to a much less 
important share) the dactyl and the tribrach 1 . These may be 
taken to represent collectively "the trisyllabic foot, which was 
inherent in the nature of the [English] language, and had 
been recognised by long poetical usage 2 ." It reproduces "the 
swift triple rhythm 2 " of Old English poetry, while the iambic 
element corresponds with the typical movement of the Greek 
senarius. And in the verse of Paradise Lost it is the iambic 
movement that prevails, especially perhaps in the first six books, 
which are cast more in the typically grand Miltonic manner 
than the second half of the poem, where the less impressive 
and less coherent interest of the subject is reflected in the style. 
But the measure of this iambic predominance depends on the 
degree to which the principle of elision of vowels applies. 

"Elision" comprehends not merely the cases where a vowel 
must be dropped altogether in pronunciation, but those more 
numerous cases where the metre indicates, or seems to indicate, 
that a vowel has something less than its normal quantitative 
value, so that it is either slurred or made almost to coalesce 
with a preceding or succeeding sound. Such elision resolves 
itself practically into cases of the open vowel and the vowel 
(or double vowel) followed by a liquid. Elision of the former 
type belongs to poetic usage, of the latter to the currency 
of everyday speech ; and each is permissive, not obligatory. 
Moreover, elision is a matter of scansion, not necessarily of 
pronunciation and reading. It is, I think, perfectly true to say 
that "Milton came to scan his verses one way, and read 
them another." But is it not true of all poetic elision ? Who 

1 See Saintsbury, A History of English Prosody, I. 403, II. -259, 260. 

2 Courthope. Compare also Mayor (Modem English Metre, p. 15): 
"Anapaestic rhythm was familiar to the Elizabethan poets, not merely 
from its use by older writers, such as the author of Piers Ploughman, 
but from the later ' tumbling verse ' as used by Skelton and Udall." 
And again (p. 44): "Trisyllabic rhythm is a marked feature of the 
Old English alliterative verse, and of the * tumbling measure ' which 
followed it." 



PARADISE LOST. Ixxi 

knows what precisely happened to the elided vowels of Greek 
and Latin verse ? Metrically their suppression may have been 
absolute, as it is (I am told) in Greek MSS. : but in actual 
declamation? Similarly, though I cannot doubt that Milton 

scanned "th' Aonian mount" and "th' oblivious pool," yet I 
should not like to say that he read the words so. Nor should I 
like to have to determine whether in scansion he extended this 
principle of the elision of the open vowel beyond monosyllables 
like the and to and the terminally which slides so easily into a 
vowel at the beginning of the next word. Thus it satisfies my 

"gross unpurged ear" to scan "Who highly thus t' entitle me 
vouchsaf'st" (X. 170) ; but to wrest an iambus out of the second 
foot of the line " Virtue in her shape how lovely ; saw and pined " 
(IV. 848) by eliding the double vowel ue (" Virtue in | her shape") 
seems a needless violence, when the easy access of the anapaest 
(" Virtue | in her shape ") solves all. And so with many another 
line. 

Some light is thrown on this difficult question of Milton's 
elisions by the Cambridge autographs of his earlier poems. The 
evidence, indeed, is not conclusive because the MSS. are not 
consistent in giving always an elided form where the metre 
requires one as an alternative to a trisyllabic scansion. But one 
cannot help drawing some, inference from elisions like "Tem- 
per'd to th' oaten flute," and elided forms such as watrie 
ivestringbatning -juandring toured, and the many con- 
tractions of the inflections of verbs, such as honour'st turtst 
forttnur'ststooptstolne dan'ct With some of these 
examples before us, it is not hard to conjecture how Milton 
would have scanned, say, Paradise Lost, xi. 779, " Wandering 
that watery desert ; I had hope." Similarly when we come 
across lines of the epic in which Heaven appears to be equivalent 
to a monosyllable, it is apposite to remember that his autograph 
has heavn in the prose draft of Adam unparaditfd (line 2). 

1 Cf. Lycidas, 4, 12, 23, 29, 31, 33; Arcades^ 21; Cornus, 39; 
Sonnets n. and XIII. 



Ixxii INTRODUCTION. 



# in the prose draft of Isaac redeemd serves as a metrical 
gloss on i. 84, " If thou beest he but Oh how fallen ! how 
changed ! " The drift of such elisions and contractions is 
obviously to diminish the trisyllabic element, and maintain that 
iambic rhythm which was ever present 1 to Milton's ear and ever 
wafting the proud full sail of his verse. 

1 Two groups of exceptions to the general movement of his lines 
have been remarked, viz. passages where he indulges his taste for 
sonorous proper names, and passages " where he follows the Authorised 
Version of the Bible especially where the speaker is the Deity." 



COMMENDATORY VERSES. 



IN PARADISUM AMISSAM SUMMI 
JOHANNIS MILTONI. 



Oui legis Amissam Paradisum, grandia magni 

Carmina Miltoni, quid nisi cuncta legis? 
Res cunctas, et cunctarum primordia rerum, 

Et fata, et fines, continet iste liber. 
Intima panduntur magni penetralia mundi, 

Scribitur et toto quicquid in orbe latet ; 
Terraeque, tractusque maris, ccelumque profundum, 

Sulphureumque Erebi flammivomumque specus; 
Quaeque colunt terras, pontumque, et Tartara caeca, 

Quaeque colunt summi lucida regna poli ; 10 

Et quodcunque ullis conclusum est finibus usquam ; 

Et sine fine Chaos, et sine fine Deus ; 
Et sine fine magis, si quid magis est sine fine, 

In Christo erga homines conciliatus amor. 
Haec qui speraret quis crederet esse futurum? 

Et tamen haec hodie terra Britanna legit. 
O quantos in bella duces, quae protulit arma! 

Quae canit, et quanta, praelia dira tuba! 
Ccelestes acies, atque in certamine ccelum! 

Et quae coelestes pugna deceret agros! 20 

Quantus in setheriis tollit se Lucifer armis, 

Atque ipso graditur vix Michaele minor! 

P. L. I 



COMMENDATORY VERSES. 

Ouantis et quam funestis concurritur iris, 

Dum ferus hie Stellas protegit, ille rapit! 
Dum vulsos montes ceu tela reciproca torquent, 

Et non mortali desuper igne pluunt : 
Stat dubius cui se parti concedat Olympus, 

Et metuit pugnre non superesse suae. 
At simul in ccelis Messiae insignia fulgent, 

Et currus animes, armaque digna Deo, 30 

Horrendumque rotae strident, et saeva rotarum 

Erumpunt torvis fulgura luminibus, 
Et flammae vibrant, et vera tonitrua rauco 

Admistis flammis insonuere polo, 
Excidit attonitis mens omnis, et impetus omnis, 

Et cassis dextris irrita tela cadunt ; 
Ad pcenas fugiunt, et, ceu foret Orcus asylum, 

Infernis certant condere se tenebris. 
Cedite, Romani Scriptores ; cedite, Graii ; 

Et quos fama recens vel celebravit anus : 40 

Haec quicunque leget tantum cecinisse putabit 

Mieonidem ranas, Virgilium culices. 

S. B., M.D. 



ON PARADISE LOST. 

WHEN I beheld the Poet blind, yet bold, 

In slender book his vast design unfold, 

Messiah crowned, God's reconciled decree, 

Rebelling Angels, the Forbidden Tree, 

Heaven, Hell, Earth, Chaos, all ; the argument 

Held me a while misdoubting his intent, 

That he would ruin (for I saw him strong) 

The sacred truths to fable and old song 

(So Samson groped the temple's posts in spite), 

The world o'ei whelming to revenge his sight. 10 



COMMENDATORY VERSES. 3 

Yet as I read, soon growing less severe, 
I liked his project, the success did fear; 
Through that wide field how he his way should find 
O'er which lame Faith leads Understanding blind ; 
Lest he perplexed the things he would explain, 
And what was easy he should render vain. 

Or, if a work so infinite he spanned, 
Jealous I was that some less skilful hand 
(Such as disquiet always what is well, 
And by ill imitating would excel) 20 

Might hence presume the whole Creation's day 
To change in scenes, and show it in a play. 

Pardon me, mighty Poet; nor despise 
My causeless, yet not impious, surmise. 
But I am now convinced, and none will dare 
Within thy labours to pretend a share. 
Thou hast not missed one thought that could be fit, 
And all that was improper dost omit ; 
So that no room is here for writers left, 
But to detect their ignorance or theft. 30 

That majesty which through thy work doth reign 
Draws the devout, deterring the profane. 
And things divine thou treat'st of in such state 
As them preserves, and thee, inviolate. 
At once delight and horror on us seize ; 
Thou sing'st with so much gravity and ease, 
And above human flight dost soar aloft 
With plume so strong, so equal, and so soft. 
The bird named from that Paradise you sing 
So never flags, but always keeps on wing. 4^ 

Where could'st thou words of such a compass find? 
Whence furnish such a vast expense of mind? 
Just Heaven, thee like Tiresias to requite, 
Rewards with prophecy thy loss of sight. 

Well might'st thou scorn thy readers to allure 
With tinkling rime, of thy own sense secure ; 

I 2 



COMMENDATORY VERSES. 

While the Town-Bayes writes all the while and spells, 

And, like a pack-horse, tires without his bells. 

Their fancies like our bushy points appear; 

The poets tag them, we for fashion wear. 50 

I too, transported by the mode, offend, 

And while I meant to praise thee, must commend. 

Thy verse created like thy theme sublime, 

In number, weight, and measure, needs not rime. 

A. M. 



THE VERSE 1 . 



The measure is English heroic verse, without rime, as that 
of Homer in Greek, and of Virgil in Latin; rime being no 
necessary adjunct or true ornament of poem or good verse, in 
longer works especially, but the invention of a barbarous age, to 
set off wretched matter and lame metre ; graced indeed since by 
the use of some famous modern poets, carried away by custom, 
but much to their own vexation, hindrance, and constraint to 
express many things otherwise, and for the most part worse, 
than else they would have expressed them. Not without cause, 
therefore, some both Italian and Spanish poets of prime note 
have rejected rime both in longer and shorter works, as have 
also, long since, our best English tragedies ; as a thing of itself, 
to all judicious ears, trivial and of no true musical delight ; 
which consists only in apt numbers, fit quantity of syllables, 
and the sense variously drawn out from one verse into another, 
not in the jingling sound of like endings, a fault avoided by the 

1 Preceded by some remarks from the publisher: 
The Printer to the Reader. 

Courteous Reader^ there was no Argument at first intended to the 
book; but for the satisfaction of many that have desired it, I have 
procured it, and withal a reason of that which stumbled many others, 
why the poem rimes not. S. Simmons. 



6 TJII; VERSE. 

learned ancients both in poetry and all good oratory. This 
neglect then of rime so little is to be taken for a defect, though 
it may seem so perhaps to vulgar readers, that it rather is to be 
esteemed an example set, the first in English, of ancient liberty 
recovered to heroic poem from the troublesome and modern 
bondage of riming. 



BOOK I. 



THE ARGUMENT. 

This First Book proposes, first in brief, the whole subject, Man's 
disobedience, and the loss thereupon of Paradise, wherein he was 
placed : then touches the prime cause of his fall, the Serpent, or rather 
Satan in the Serpent; who revolting from God, and drawing to his 
side many legions of Angels, was by the command of God driven out 
of Heaven with all his crew into the great Deep. Which action passed 
over, the Poem hastes into the midst of things; presenting Satan with 
his Angels now fallen into Hell, described here, not in the Centre (for 
Heaven and Earth may be supposed as yet not made, certainly not yet 
accursed) but in a place of utter darkness, fitliest called Chaos: here 
Satan with his Angels lying on the burning lake, thunderstruck and 
astonished, alter a certain space recovers, as from confusion; calls up 
him who, next in order and dignity, lay by him ; they confer of their 
miserable fall. Satan awakens all his legions, who lay till then in the 
same manner confounded; they rise: their numbers, array of battle, 
their chief leaders named, according to the idols known afterwards in 
Canaan and the countries adjoining. To these Satan directs his speech; 
comforts them with hope yet of regaining Heaven; but tells them lastly 
of a new world and new kind of creature to be created, according to an 
ancient prophecy or report in Heaven ; for that Angels were long before 
this visible creation was the opinion of many ancient Fathers. To find 
out the truth of this prophecy, and what to determine thereon, he refers 
to a full council. What his associates thence attempt. Pandemonium, 
the palace of Satan, rises, suddenly built out of the Deep : the infernal 
Peers there sit in council. 



BOOK I. 



OF Man's first disobedience, and the fruit 
Of that forbidden Tree, whose mortal taste 
Brought death into the world, and all our woe, 
With loss of Eden, till one greater Man 
Restore us, and regain the blissful seat, 
Sing, Heavenly Muse, that on the secret top 
Of Oreb, or of Sinai, didst inspire 
That shepherd, who first taught the chosen seed 
In the beginning how the Heavens and Earth 
Rose out of Chaos : or, if Sion hill 10 

Delight thee more, and Siloa's brook that flowed 
Fast by the oracle of God, I thence ^., 
Invoke thy aid to my adventurous song, 
That with no middle flight intends to soar 
Above the Aonian mount, while it pursues 
Things unattempted yet in prose or rhyme. 
And chiefly thou, O Spirit, that dost prefer 
Before all temples the upright heart and pure, 
Instruct me, for thou know'st; thou from the first 
Wast present, and, with mighty wings outspread, 20 

Dove-like sat'st brooding on the vast Abyss, 
And mad'st it pregnant : what in me is dark 



10 PARADISE LOST. 

Illumine, what is low raise and support; 
That to the highth of this great argument 
I may assert Eternal Providence, 
And justify the ways of God to men. 

Say first (for Heaven hides nothing from thy view, 
Nor the deep tract of Hell) say first what cause 
Moved our grand parents, in that happy state, 
Favoured of Heaven so highly, to fall off 30 

From their Creator, and transgress his will 
For one restraint, lords of the world besides. 
Who first seduced them to that foul revolt? 

-The infernal Serpent; he it was, whose guile, 
Stirred up with envy and revenge, deceived 
The Mother of Mankind, what time his pride 
Had cast" him 1 out from Heaven, with all his host 
Of rebel Angels, by whose aid, aspiring 
To set himself in glory above his peers, 
He trusted to have equalled the Most High, 40 

If he opposed; and with ambitious aim 
Against the throne and monarchy of God 
Raised impious war in Heaven and battle proud, 
With vain attempt. Him the Almighty Power 
Hurled headlong flaming from the ethereal sky, 
With hideous ruin and combustion, down 

| To bottomless perdition; there to dwell 

In adamantine chains and penal fire, 

I Who durst defy the Omnipotent to arms. 

Nine times the space that measures day and night 50 
To mortal men, he with his horrid crew 
Lay vanquished, rolling in the fiery gulf, 
Confounded though immortal. But his doom 
Reserved him to more wrath; for now the thought jp 
Both of lost happiness and lasting pain 



BOOK I. II 

Torments him ; round he throws his baleful eyes, 

That witnessed huge affliction and dismay, 

Mixed with obdurate pride and steadfast hate. 

At once, as far as Angels ken, he views 

The dismal situation waste and wild: j 60 

I A dungeon horrible, on all sides round,  

one great furnace flamed; yet from those flames 
Jo light, but rather darkness visible 
served only to discover sights of woe, 
 Regions of sorrow, doleful shades, where peace 
And rest can never dwell, hope never comes 
That comes to all ; but torture without end 
Still urges, and a fiery deluge, fed 
With ever-burning sulphur unconsumed. 
Such place Eternal Justice had prepared 70 

Eorjhose rebellious; here their prison ordained 
In utter darkness, and their portion set, 
As far removed from God and light of Heaven 
As from the centre thrice to the utmost pole. 
Oh how unlike the place from whence they fell ! 
There the companions of his fall, o'erwhelmed 
With floods and whirlwinds of tempestuous fire, 
He soon discerns ; and, weltering by his side, f^j^ 
One next himself in power, and next in crime, V|, 
Long after known in Palestine, and named 
Beelzebub. To whom the Arch-Enemy, 
And thence in Heaven called Satan, with bold words 
Breaking the horrid silence, thus began : 
 " If thou beest he but Oh how fallen ! how changed 
 From him, who in the happy realms of light, 
 Clothed with transcendent brightness, didst outshine 
! Myriads, though bright! if he whom mutual 
1 United thoughts and counsels, equal hope 



12 PARADISE LOST. 

And hazard in the glorious enterprise, 

Joined with me once, now misery hath joined 90 

In equal ruin : into what pit thou seest 

From what highth fallen, so much the stronger proved 

He with his thunder: and till then who knew 

The force of those dire arms? Yet not for those, 

Nor what the potent victor in his rage 

i Can else inflict, do I repent, or change, 

Though changed in outward lustre,, that fixed mind, I 

And high disdain from sense of injured merit,  

That with the Mightiest raised me to contend, 
And to the fierce contention brought along 100 

Innumerable force of Spirits armed, 
That durst dislike his reign, and, me preferring, 
His utmost power with adverse power opposed 
In dubious battle on the plains of Heaven, 
And shook his throne. What though the field be lost? 
AlLJs_not; Jpst : the unconquerable will, 
And study of revenge, immortal hate, 
And courage never to submit or yield: 
And what is elsejiot to be overcome? 
That glory never shall his wrath or might no 

Extort from me. To bow and sue for grace 
With suppliant knee, and deify his power 
Who, from the terror of this arm, so late 
Doubted his empire that were low indeed ; 
That were an ignominy and shame beneath 

JThis downfall ; since by fate the strength of gods 
And this empyreal substance cannot fail; | 
Since, through experience of this great event, 
In arms not worse, in foresight much advanced, 
We may with more successful hope resolve 120 

To wage by force or guile eternal war, 



BOOK I. 13 

Irreconcilable to our grand foe, 

Who now triumphs, and in the excess of joy 

Sole reigning holds the tyranny of Heaven." 

So spake the apostate Angel, thf^hjinj^ain,^ jc&jj& *.*< 
Vaunting aloud, but racked with deep despair; ' f 
And him thus answered soon his bold compeer: 

"O Prince, O Chief of many throned powers, 
That led the embattled Serapjvim to war 
Under thy conduct, and, in dreadful deeds 130 

Fearless, endangered Heaven's perpetual King, 

Whether upheld by strength, or chance, or fate! 

Too well I see and rue the dire event 

That with sad overthrow and foul defeat 

Hath lost us Heaven, and all this mighty host 

In horrible destruction laid thus low, 

As far as gods and Heavenly essences 

Can perish: for the mind and spirit remains 

Invincible, and vigour .soon returns, 140 

Though all our glory extinct, and happy state ___ 

Here swallowed up in endless misery. 

But what if he our conqueror (whom I now 

Of force believe almighty, since no less 



li 



Than such could have o'erpowered such force as ou 

Have left us this our spirit and strength entire, 
i Strongly to suffer and support our pains, 
That we may so suffice his vengeful ire; 

Or do him mightier service, as his thralls 

By right of war, whate'er his business be, 150 

Here in the heart of Hell to work in fire, 

Or do his errands in the gloomy deep? 

What can it then avail, though yet we feel 

Strength undiminished, or eternal being 






14 PARADISE LOST. 

To undergo eternal punishment?" 

Whereto with speedy words the Arch-Fiend replied : 
" Fallen Cherub, to be weak is miserable, 
Doing or suffering: but of this be sure, 
To do aught good never will be our task, 
gut ever to do illjQur p"lfi delight, 160 

As being the contrary to his high will 
Whom we resist. If then his providence 
Out of our evil seek to bring forth good, 
Our labour must be to pervert that end, 
And out of good still to find means of evil ; 
WhichjpJtJ.^es may ^succeed, so as perhaps 

; Shall grieve him, if I fail not, and disturb 
His inmost counsels from their destined aim. 
But see ! the angry victor hath recalled 
His ministers of vengeance and pursuit 170 

Back to the gates of Heaven; the sulphurous hail, 
Shot after us in storm, o'erblown hath laid 
The fiery surge that from the precipice 
Of Heaven received us falling; and the thunder, 
Winged with red lightning and impetuous rage, 
Perhaps hath spent his shafts, and ceases now 
To bellow through the vast and boundless deep. 

Let us not slip the occasion,iwhether scorn 

*Or satiate fury yield it from our foe. 
Seest thou yon dreary plain, forlorn and wild, 180 

The seat of desolation, void of light, 
Save what the glimmering of these livid flames 
Casts pale and dreadful? Thither let us tend 
From off the tossing of these fiery waves; 
There rest, if any rest can harbour there; 
And, re-assembling our afflicted powers, 
Consult how we may henceforth most offend 




BOOK I. 

Our enemy, our own loss how repair 
How overcome this dire calamity, 

XVhat reinforcement we may gain from hope, 190 

If not what resolution from despair." 

Thus Satan, talking to his nearest mate, 
With head uplift above the wave, and eyes 
That sparkling blazed; his other parts besides,*** 
Prone on the flood, extended long and large, 
Lay floating many a rood, in bulk as huge 
As whom the fables name of monstrous size, 
or Earth-born, that warred on 




Briaregs or Typfrori, whom the den 

By ancient T.aiSljs-feekl, or that sea-beast 200 

I^vjatban, which God of all his works 

Created hugest that swim the ocean-stream. 

Him, haply, slumbering on the Norway foam, 

The pilot of some small night-foundered skiff 

Deeming some island, oft, as seamen tell, 

With fixed anchor in his scaly rind, 

Moors by his side under the lee, while night 

Invests the sea, and wished morn delays. 

So stretched out huge in length the Arch-Fiend lay, . i 

Chained on the bu^mingjake ; nor ever thence C ?^ X 

Had^risen_or heaved fog head., but that the will 

And high permission of all-ruling Heaven 

Left him at large to his own dark designs, 
vThat with reiterated crimes he might 

Uieap on himself damnation, while he sought 

Evil to others, and enraged might see 

How all his malice served but to bring fortnS 

Infinite goodness, grace and mercy shewn  
I On Man by him seduced, but on himself 
"Treble confusion, wrath and vengeance poured. 220 



1 6 PARADISE LOST. 

Forthwith upright he rears from off the pool 
His mighty stature; on each hand the flames 
Driven backward slope their pointing spires, and, rolled 
In billows, leave i' the midst a horrid vale. 
Then with expanded wings he steers his flight 
Aloft, incumbent on the dusky air, 
That felt unusual weight; till on dry land 
He lights if it were land that ever burned 
With solid, as the lake with liquid fire, 
And such appeared in hue, as when the force 230 

Of subterranean wind transports a hill 
Torn from Pelorus, or the shattered side 
Of thundering ^Etna, whose combustible 
And fuelled entrails thence conceiving fire, 
Sublimed with mineral fury, aid the winds, 
And leave a singed bottom all involved 
With stench and smoke : such resting found the sole 
Of unblest feet. Him followed his next mate, 
Both glorying to have scaped the Stygian flood 
As gods, and by their own recovered^strength^ 
Not by the sufferance of supernal power. 

"Is this the region, this the soil, the clime," 
Said then the lost Archangel, "this the seat - 
That we must change for Heaven? this mournful glooi 
For that celestial light? Be it_so, since he 
Who now is sovran can dispose and bid 
What shall be right: farthest from him is best, 
Whom reason hath equalled, force hath made supremj 
Above his equals. Farewell, happy fields, 
. Where joy for ever dwells ! Hail, horrors ! hail, 25 

"&* i Infernal world ! and thou, profoundest Hell, 
I Receive thy new possessor, one who brings 
I A mind not to be changed by place or time. 



<4*0 

BOOK I. 



| The mind is its own place, and in itself 
VCarf mate a Heaven orHeH;~a~ITeir6f Heaven. 
What matter where, if I be still the same, 
And what I should be, all but less > than he 
Whom thunder hath made greater? Here at least 
We shaft be free ; the Almighty hath not built 
Here for his envy, will not drive us hence : 
Here we may reign secure, and in my choice 
T reign is worth ambition, though in Hell : 
Better to reign in Hell, than serve 
BHTw 

The associates and co-partners of our loss, 
Lie thus astonished on the oblivious pool, 
And call them not to share with us their part 
In this unhappy mansion, or once more S^ 
With rallied arms to try what may be yet 
Regained in Heaven, or what more lost in Hell?" 

So Satan spake; and him Beelzebub 
 Thus answered : " Leader of those~armTes bright 
Which but the Omnipotent none could have foiled, 
If once they hear that voice, their liveliest pledge 
Of hope in fears and dangers heard so oft ^ 
In worst, extremes^ and on the perilous edge 
Of battle when it raged, in all assaults 
Their surest signal they will soon resume 
New courage and revive, though now they lie 




260 




As we erewhile, astounded and amazed 

No wonder, fallen such a pernicious highth ! '!*->? 

He scarce had ceased when the superior frjencL 
Was moving toward the shore; his ponderous shield, 
Ethereal temper, massy, large, and round, 
Behind him cast. The broad circumference 



P. L. 



V 



1 8 PARADISE LOST. 

Hung on his shoulders like the moon, whose orb 
Through optic glass the Tuscan artist views 

 At evening from the top of Fesole, 

Or in Valdarno, to descry new lands, 290 

 Rivers, or mountains, in her spotty globe. 
 His spear to equal which the tallest pine 
Hewn on Norwegian hills, to be the mast 
Of some great ammiral, were but a wand 
He walked with, to support uneasy^eps 
Over the burning marie, not like those steps 
On Heaven's azure; and the torrid clime 
Smote on him sore besides, vaulted with fire. 
Nathless he so endured, till on the beach 
Of that inflamed sea he stood, and called 300 

His legions, Angelforms, who lay entranced, 
Thick as autumnal leaves that strow the brooks 
In Vallornbrosa, where the Etrurian shades 
High over-arched embower; or scattered sedge 
Afloat, when with fierce winds Orion armed 
Hath vexed the Red-Sea coast, whose waves o'erthrew 
Eusiris^and his Memphian chivalry, 
While with rjerfi^ipus hatred they pursued 
The sojourners of Goshen, who beheld 
From the safe shore their floating carcases 310 

And broken chariot-wheels : so thick bestrown, 
Abject and lost, lay these, covering the flood, 
Under amazement of their fridgons change. 
He called, so loud that all the hollow deep 
Of Hell resounded : " Princes, Potentates, 
Warriors, the flower of Heaven, once yours, now lost, 
If such VMiisfyment a this can seize 
Eternal 3p * or I < ye chosen this place 
After the to^"3f br. ^ to repose 



BOOK I. 19 

r our wearied virtue, for the ease you find  320 

JTo slumber here, as in the vales of Heaven? 
[Or in this abject posture have ye sworn 
To adore the conqueror, who now beholds 
Chsuib and Seraph rolling in the flood 
With scattered^afms and ensigns, till anon 
His swift pursuers from Heaven-gates discern 
The advantage, and descending tread us down 
Thus drooping, or with linked thunderbolts 
Transfix us to the bottom of this gulf? 
Awake, arise, or be for ever fallen!" 330 

They heard, and were abashed, and up they sprung 
Upon the wing, as when men wont to watch 
On duty, sleeping found by whom they dread, 
Rouse and bestir themselves ere well awake. 
Nor did they not perceive the evil plight 
In which they were, or the fiejcje^pains not feel ; 

*Yet to their General's voice they soon obeyed 
Innumerable. As when the potent rod 
Of ArnnmVs^son, in Egypt's evil day, 
Waved round the coast, up called a pitchy cloud 340 
Of locusts, warping on the eastern wind, 

j That o'er the rejdm_jLmip^^ 

I Like night, and darkened all the land of Nile : 
So numberless were jhose_bad Angels_seen 
Hovering on wing under the cope of Hell, 
'Twixt upper, nether, and surrounding fires; 
Till, as a signal given, the uplifted spear 
Of their great Sultan waving to direct: 
Their course, in even balance down they light 
On the firm brimstone, and fill all the plain j; 350 

A multitude, like which the po n ms No; i-il ' r 
Poured never from her frozen loiriM^to pas'J 

2 2 



2O PARADISE LOST. 

Rhene or the Danaw, when her barbarous sons 

Came like a deluge on the South, and spread 

Beneath Gibraltar to the Libyan sands. 

Forthwith, from every squadron and each band, 

The heads and leaders thither haste where stood 

Their great ^Qprttmander ; godlike shapes, andjbnns 

Excelling human, princely dignities, 

And powers that erst in Heaven sat on thrones; ->.6o 

Though of their names in Heavenly records now 

Be no memorial, blotted out and rased 

By their rebellion from the Books of Life. 
 j 

%$> ^.j-j Nor had they yet among the sons of Eve 

I Got them new names, till, wandering o'er the Earth, 
Through God's high sufferance for the trial of Man, 
By falsities and lies the greatest part 
Of Mankind they corrupted to forsake 
God their Creator, and the invisible 
Glory of him that made them to transform 370 

Oft to the image of a brute, adorned 
With gay religions full of pomp and gold, 
And devils to adore for deities. 

(Then were they known to men by various names, 
And various idols through the heathen world.  
Say, Muse, their names then known, who first, who last, 
Roused from the slumber on that fiery couch, 
At their great Emperor's call, as next in worth 
Came singly where he stood on the bare strand, 
While the promiscuous crowd stood yet aloof. 380 

The chief were those who, from the pit of Hell 
Roaming to seek their prey on Earth, durst fix 
Their seats long after next the seat of God, 
Their altars by his altar, gods adored 
Among the nations round, and durst abide 



BOOK I. 21 

Jehovah thundering ouj of^Sion, throned 

Between trie hiubiinj yea, often placed 

Within his sanctuary itself their shrines, 

Abominations ; and with cursed things 

His holy rites and solemn feasts profaned, 390 

And with their darkness durst affront his light. 

First, Moloch, horrid king, besmeared with blood 

Of human sacrifice, and parents' tears, 

Though, for the noise of drums and timbrels loud, 

Their children's cries unheard, that passed through fire 

To his grim idol. Hioi__tli_ Ammonite 

Worshiped in Rabba and her watery plain, 

In Argob and in Basan, to the stream 

Of ^tmosj^Acnon. Nor content with such 

Audacious neighbourhood, the wisest heart 400 

Of Solomon he led by fraud to build 

His temple right against the temple of God 

On that opprobrious hill, and made his grove 

The pleasant valley of Hinnom, Tophet thence 

And black Gehenna called, the type of Hell. 

NejcM^hejiiQs, the obscene dread of Moab's sons, 

From Aroer to Nebo, and the wild 

Of southmost Abarim ; in Hesebon 

And Horonaim, Seon's realm, beyond 

The flowery dale of Sibma clad with vines, 410 

And Eleale to the Asphaltic pool. 

Peor his other name, when he enticed 

Israel in Sittim, on their march from Nile, 

To do him wanton rites, which cost them woe. 

Yet thence his lustful orgies he enlarged 

Even to that hill of scandal, by the grove 

Of Moloch homicide, lust hard by hate; 

Till good Josiah drove them thence to Hell. 



22 PARADISE LOST. 

With these came they who, from the bordering flood 
Of old Euphrates to the brook that parts 420 

Egypt from Syrian ground, had general names 
f Of Baalim and Ashtaroth those male, 
J I These feminine. For Spirits, when they please, 
X Can either sex assume, or both; so soft 
And uncompounded is their essence pure, 
Not tied or manacled with joint or limb, 
Nor founded on the brittle strength of bones, 
Like cumbrous flesh ; but, in what shape they choose, 
Dilated or condensed, bright or obscure, 
Can execute their aery purposes, 43 

And works of love or enmity fulfil. 
For those the race of Israel oft forsook 
Their living Strength, and unfrequented left 
His righteous altar, bowing lowly down 
 To bestial gods; for which their heads as low 

Bowed down in battle, sunk before the spear 
 Of despicable foes. With these in troop 
Vcame Astoreth, whom the Phoenicians called 
Astarte, Queen of Heaven, with crescent horns ; 
To whose bright image nightly by the moon 44 

Sidonian virgins paid their vows and songs; 
In Sion also not unsung, where stood 
Her 'temple on the offensive mountain, built 
By that uxorious king whose heart, though large, 
Beguiled by fair idolatresses, fell 
To idols foul. Thammuz came next behind, 
Whose annual wound in Lebanon allured 
The Syrian damsels to lament his fate 
In amorous ditties all a summer's day, 
While smooth Adonis from his native rock 45 

Ran purple to the sea, supposed with blood 




BOOK I. 23 

Of Thammuz yearly wounded : the love-tale 
Infected Sion's daughters with like heat, 
Whose wanton passions in the sacred porch 

^Ezekiel saw, when, by the vision led, 

 His eye surveyed the dark idolatries 

j Of alienated Judah. Next came one 

.,Who mourned in earnest, when the captive ark 
Maimed his brute image, head and hands lopt off 
In his own temple, on the grunsel-edge, 460 

Where he fell flat, and shamed his worshipers : 
Dagon his name, sea-monster, upward man 
And downward fish; yet had his temple high 
Reared in Azotus, dreaded through the coast 
Of Palestine, in Oath and Ascalon, 
And Accaron and Gaza's frontier bounds. 
Him followed Rimmon, whose delightful seat 
Was fair Damascus, on the fertile banks 
Of Abbana and Pharphar, lucid streams. 
He also against the house of God was. bold: 470 

A leper once he lost and gained a king, 
Ahaz, his sottish conqueror, whom he drew 
God's altar to disparage and displace 
For one of Syrian mode, whereon to burn 
His odious offerings, and adore the gods 
Whom he had vanquished. After these appeared 
A crew who, under names of old renown, 
Osiris, Isis, Orus, and their train, 
With monstrous shapes and sorceries abused 
Fanatic Egypt and her priests, to seek 480 

Their wandering gods disguised in brutish forms 
Rather than human. Nor did Israel scape 
The infection, when their borrowed gold composed 
The calf in Oreb ; and the rebel king 



24 PARADISE LOST. 

Doubled that sin in Bethel and in Dan, 
Likening his Maker to the grazed ox 
Jehovah, who, in one night, when he passed 
From Egypt marching, equalled with one stroke 
Both her first-born and all her bleating gods. 
Belial came last, than whom a Spirit more lewd 490 

Fell not from Heaven, or more gross to love 
Vice for itself. To him no temple stood 
Or altar smoked; yet who more oft than he 
In temples and at altars, when the priest 
Turns atheist, as did Eli's sons, who filled 
With lust and violence the house of God? 
In courts and palaces he also reigns, 
And in luxurious cities, where the noise 
Of riot ascends above their loftiest towers, 
And injury and outrage; and when night 500 

Darkens the streets, then wander forth the sons 
Of Belial, flown with insolence and wine. 
Witness the streets of Sodom, and that night 
In Gibeah, when the hospitable door 
Exposed a matron, to avoid worse rape. 
^ These were the prime in order and in might ; 
*The rest were long to tell, though far renowned, 
The Ionian gods of Javan's issue held 
Gods, yet confessed later than Heaven and Earth, 
Their boasted parents : Titan, Heaven's first-born, 510 
With his enormous brood, and birthright seized 
By younger Saturn; he from mightier Jove, 
His own and Rhea's son, like measure found ; 
So Jove usurping reigned. These, first in Crete 
And Ida known, thence on the snowy top 
Of cold Olympus ruled the middle air, 
Their highest Heaven ; or on the Delphian cliff, 



BOOK I. 25 

Or in Dodona, and through all the bounds 

Of Doric land ; or who with Saturn old 

Fled over Adria to the Hesperian fields, 520 

And o'er the Celtic roamed the utmost isles. 

All these and more came flocking; but with looks 
Downcast and damp, yet such wherein appeared 
Obscure some glimpse of joy, to have found their Chief 
Not in despair, to have found themselves not lost 
In loss itself; which on his countenance cast 
Like doubtful hue. But he, his wonted pride 
Scxm recollecting, with jhigri words, that bora 

not substancef gently raised 



Their fainting courage, and dispelled their fears : 530 

Then straight commands that, at the warlike sound 

Of trumpets loud and clarions, be upreared 

His mighty standard. That proud honour claimed 

Azazel as his right, a Cherub tall: 

Who forthwith from the glittering staff unfurled 

The imperial ensign, which, full high advanced, 

Shone like a meteor streaming to the wind, 

With gems and golden lustre rich emblazed, 

Seraphic arms and trophies ; all the while 

Sonorous metal blowing martial sounds : 540 

At which the universal host up-sent 

A shout that tore Hell's concave, and beyond 

Frighted the reign of Chaos and old Night. 

All in a moment through the gloom were seen 

Ten thousand banners rise into the air, 

With orient colours waving; with them rose 

A forest huge of spears ; and thronging helms 

Appeared, and serried shields in thick array 

Of depth immeasurable. Anon they move 

In perfect phalanx to the Dorian mood 550 



26 PARADISE LOST. 

Of flutes and soft recorders ; such as raised 
To highth of noblest temper heroes old 
Arming to battle, and instead of rage 
Deliberate valour breathed, firm and unmoved 
With dread of death to flight or foul retreat; 
Nor wanting power to mitigate and swage, 
With solemn touches, troubled thoughts, and chase 
Anguish and doubt and fear and sorrow and pain 
From mortal or immortal minds. Thus they, 
.Breathing united force with fixed thought, 560 

j fi Moved on in silence to soft pipes that charmed 
Their painful steps o'er the burnt soil; >and now 
Advanced in view they stand, a horrid front 
Of dreadful length and dazzling arms, in guise 
Of warriors old, with ordered spear and shield, 
Awaiting what command their mighty Chief 
Had to impose. He through the armed files 
Darts his experienced eye, and soon traverse 
The whole battalion views their order due, 
Their visages and stature as of gods; 570 

Their number last he sums. And now his heart 
Distends with pride, and hardening in his strength 
Glories; for never, since created Man, 
Met such embodied force as, named with these, 
Could merit more than that small infantry 
Warred on by cranes : though all the giant brood 
Of Phlegra with the heroic race were joined 
That fought at Thebes and Ilium, on each side 
Mixed with auxiliar gods; and what resounds 
In fable or romance of Uther's son, 580 

Begirt with British and Armoric knights; 
And all who since, baptized or infidel, 
Jousted in Aspramont, or Montalban, 



BOOK I. 27 

Damasco, or Marocco, or Trebisond ; 

Or whom Biserta sent from Afric shore 

When Charlemain with all his peerage fell 

By Fontarabbia. Thus far these beyond 

Compare of mortal prowess, yet observed 

Their dread Commander. He, above the rest 

In shape and gesture proudly eminent, 590 

Stood like a tower; I his form had yet not lost 

All her original brightness, prior appeared 

Less than Archangel ruined, and the excess 

Of glory obscured : as when the sun new-risen 

Looks through the horizontal misty air 

Shorn of his beams, or from behind the moon, 

In dim eclipse, disastrous twilight sheds 

On half the nations, and with fear of change 

Perplexes monarchs. Darkened so, yet shone 

Above them all the Archangel; but his face 600 

Deep scars of thunder had intrenched, and care 

Sat on his faded cheek, but under brows 

Of dauntless courage, .and considerate pride 

Waiting revenge. Cruel his eye, but cast 

Signs of remorse and passion, to behold 

The fellows of his crime, the followers rather 

(Far other once beheld in bliss), condemned 

For ever now to have their lot in pain ; III 

Millions of Spirits for his fault amerced l^T.. . AJ**** :"* 

Of Heaven, and from eternal splendours flung 610 

For his revolt; vet faithful how r tfrev stood. 

Their glory withered : as, when Heaven's fire 

Hath scathed the forest oaks or mountain pines, 

With singed top their stately growth, though bare, 

Stands on the blasted heath. He now prepared 

To speak ; whereat their doubled ranks they bend 



28 PARADISE LOST. 

From wing to wing, and half enclose him round 
With all his peers : attention held them mute. 
Thrice he assayed, and thrice, in spite of scorn, 
Tears, such as Angels weep, burst forth : at last 620 

Words interwove with sighs found out their way : 

" O myriads of immortal Spirits ! O Powers 
Matchless, but with the Almighty ! and that strife 
Was not inglorious, though the event was dire, 
As this place testifies, and this dire change, 
Hateful to utter. I But what power of mind, 
Foreseeing or presaging, from the depth 
Of knowledge past or present, could have feared 
How such united force of gods, how such i 
As stood like these, could ever know repulse? I 630 

For who can yet believe, though after loss, 
That all these puissant legions, whose exile 
Hath emptied Heaven, shall fail to re-ascend, 
Self-raised, and re-possess their native seat? 
For me, be witness all the host of Heaven, 
If counsels different, or danger shunned 
By me, have lost our hopes. But he who reigns 
Monarch in Heaven, till then as one secure 
Sat on his throne, upheld by old repute, 
Consent or custom, and his regal state ^ 640 

Put forth at full,V^ut still his strength concealed, 
Which tempted our attempt, and wrought our fall. 
Henceforth his might we know, and know our own, 
So as not either to provoke, or dread 
New war, provoked;; our better part remains 
To work in close design, by fraud or guile, 
What force effected not; that he no less 
At length from us may find, who overcomes 
By force hath overcome but half his foe. 



 



BOOK I. 29 

Space may produce new worlds; whereof so rife 650 

There went a fame in Heaven that he ere long 

Intended to create, and therein plant 

A generation whom his choice regard 

Should favour equal to the Sons of Heaven. 

Thither, if but to pry, shall be perhaps 

Our first eruption, thither or elsewhere; 

For this infernal pit shall never hold 

Celestial Spirits in bondage, nor the Abyss 

Long under darkness cover. But these thoughts 

Full counsel must mature. Peace is despaired, 660 

For who can think submission? War, then, war 

Open or understood, must be resolved." 

He spake ; and, to confirm his words, out-flew 
Millions of flaming swords, drawn from the thighs 
Of mighty Cherubim ; the sudden blaze 
Far round illumined Hell. Highly they raged 
Against the Highest, and fierce with grasped arms 
Clashed on their sounding shields the din of war, 
Hurling defiance toward the vault of Heaven. 

There stood a hill not far, whose grisly top 670 

Belched fire and rolling smoke; the rest entire 
Shone with a glossy scurf, undoubted sign 
That in his womb was hid metallic ore, 
The work of sulphur. Thither, winged with speed, 
A numerous brigad hastened : as when bands 
Of pioners, with spade and pickaxe armed, 
Forerun the royal camp, to trench a field, 
Or cast a rampart. Mammon led them on, UJ^ 
Mammon, the least erected SpTriFTEaTTell 679 

From Heaven, for even in Heaven his looks and thoughts 
Were always downward bent, admiring more 
The riches of Heaven's pavement, trodden gold, 



30 PARADISE LOST. 

Than aught divine or holy else enjoyed 

In vision beatific. By him first 

Men also, and by his suggestion taught, 

Ransacked the centre, and with impious hands 

Rifled the bowels of their mother Earth 

For treasures better hid. Soon had his crew 

Opened into the hill a spacious wound, 

And digged out ribs of gold. Let none admire 690 

That riches grow in Hell; that soil may best 

Deserve the precious bane. And here let those 

Who boast in mortal things, and wondering tell 

Of Babel, and the works of Memphian kings, 

Learn how their greatest monuments of fame, 

And strength, and art, are easily outdone 

By Spirits reprobate, and in an hour 

What in an age they, with incessant toil 

And hands innumerable, scarce perform. 

Nigh on the plain, in many cells prepared, 700 

That underneath had veins of liquid fire 

Sluiced from the lake, a second multitude 

With wondrous art founded the massy ore, 

Severing each kind, and scummed the bullion-dross. 

A third as soon had formed within the ground 

A various mould, and from the boiling cells 

By strange conveyance filled each hollow nook : 

As in an organ, from one blast of wind, 

To many a row of pipes the sound-board breathes. 

Anon out of the earth a fabric huge 710 

Rose like an exhalation, with the sound 

Of dulcet symphonies and voices sweet, 

Built like a temple, where pilasters round 

Were set, and Doric pillars overlaid 

With golden architrave; nor did there want 



BOOK I. 31 

Cornice or frieze, with bossy sculptures graven ; 

The roof was fretted gold. Not Babylon, 

Nor great Alcairo, such magnificence 

Equalled in all their glories, to enshrine 

Belus or Serapis their gods, or seat 720 

Their kings, when Egypt with Assyria strove 

In wealth and luxury. The ascending pile 

Stood fixed her stately highth, and straight the doors, 

Opening their brazen folds, discover, wide 

Within, her ample spaces o'er the smooth 

And level pavement: from the arched roof, 

Pendent by subtle magic, many a row 

Of starry lamps and blazing cressets, fed 

With naphtha and asphaltus, yielded light 

As from a sky. The hasty multitude 730 

Admiring entered, and the work some praise, 

And some the architect: his hand was known 

In Heaven by many a towered structure high, 

Where sceptred Angels held their residence, 

And sat as princes, whom the supreme King 

Exalted to such power, and gave to rule, 

Each in his Hierarchy, the Orders bright. 

Nor was his name unheard or unadored 

In ancient Greece; and in Ausonian land 

Men called him Mulciber; and how he fell 740 

From Heaven they fabled, thrown by angry Jove 

Sheer o'er the crystal battlements : from morn 

To noon he fell, from noon to dewy eve, 

A summer's day; and with the setting sun 

Dropt from the zenith, like a falling star, 

On Lemnos, the yEgaean isle. Thus they relate, 

Erring; for he with this rebellious rout 

Fell long before; nor aught availed him now 



32 PARADISE LOST. 

To have built in Heaven high towers; nor did he scape 
 By all his engines, but was headlong sent 750 

 With his industrious crew to build in Hell. 
^ Meanwhile the winged haralds, by command 
Of sovran power, with awful ceremony 
And trumpet's sound, throughout the host proclaim 
A solemn council forthwith to be held 
At Pandemonium, the high capital 
Of Satan and his peers. Their summons called 
From every band and squared regiment 
By place or choice the worthiest; they anon 
With hundreds and with thousands trooping came 760 
Attended. All access was thronged, the gates 
And porches wide, but chief the spacious hall 
(Though like a covered field, where champions bold 
Wont ride in armed, and at the Soldan's chair 

r Defied the best of Panim chivalry 
To mortal combat, or career with lance) 
Thick swarmed, both on the ground and in the air,^;* j 
Brushed with the hiss of rustling wings. As bees 
In spring-time, when the Sun with Taurus rides, 
Pour forth their populous youth about the hive 770 

In clusters; they among fresh dews and flowers 
Fly to and fro, or on the smoothed plank, 
The suburb of their straw-built citadel, 
New rubbed with balm, expatiate and confer 
. Their state-affairs. So thick the aery crowd 

^ Swarmed and were straitened; till, the signal given, 

Behold a wonder ! they but now who seemed 
In bigness to surpass Earth's giant sons, 
Now less than smallest dwarfs, in narrow room 
Throng numberless, like that pygmean race 780 

Beyond the Indian mount; or Jae.ryjslves, 



BOOK I. 33 

Whose midnight revels, by a forest-side 

Or fountain, some belated peasant sees, 

Or dreams he sees, while overhead the moon 

Sits arbitress, and nearer to the Earth 

Wheels her pale course; they, on their mirth and dance 

Intent, with jocund music charm his ear; 

At once with joy and fear his heart rebounds. 

Thus incorporeal Spirits to smallest forms 

Reduced their shapes immense, and were at large, 790 

Though without number still, amidst the hall 

Of that infernal court. But far within, 

And in their own dimensions like themselves, 

The great Seraphic Lords and Cherubim 

In close recess and secret conclave sat, 

A thousand demi-gods on golden seats, 

Frequent and full. After short silence then, 

And summons read, the great consult began. 



P. L. 



BOOK II. 



32 



THE ARGUMENT. 

The consultation begun, Satan debates whether another battle be to 
be hazarded for the recovery of Heaven : some advise it, others dissuade. 
A third proposal is preferred, mentioned before by Satan, to search the 
truth of that prophecy ortradition in Heaven concerning another-Meorld. 
and another kind of creature, equaUor^not much inferior, to them- 
je^s7ab^uT~thtsTrme to be created. Their doubt who shall be sent 
on this difficult search : Satan, their chief, undertakes alone the voyage; 
is honoured and applauded. The council thus ended, the rest betake 
them several ways and to several employments, as their inclinations 
lead them, to entertain the time till Satan return. He passes on his 
journey to Hell-gates, finds them shut, and who sat there to guard 
them ; by whom at length they are opened, and discover to him the 
great gulf between Hell and Heaven ; with what difficulty he passes 
through, directed by Chaos, the Power of that place, to the sight 
of this new world which he sought. 



BOOK II. 



HIGH on a throne of royal state, which far 
Outshone the wealth of Ormus and of Ind, 
Or where the gorgeous East with richest hand 
Showers on her kings barbaric pearland gold, 

* Satan exalted sat, by merit raised -Jf* > +&V 

To that bad eminence; and, from despair 
Thus high uplifted beyond hope, aspires 
Beyond thus high, insatiate to pursue 
Vain jwa with fTeave.n ; and, by success untaught, 
His proud imaginations thus displayed : I0 

" Powers and Dominions, Deities of Heaven ! 
For since no deep within her gulf can hold 
Immortal vigour, though oppressed and fallen, 
I give not Heaven for lost: from this descent 
Celestial Virtues rising will appear 
More glorious and more dread than from no fall, 
And trust themselves to fear no second fate. 
Me though just right, and the fixed laws of Heaven, 
Did first create your leader, next, free choice, 
With what besides, in counsel or in fight, 20 

Hath been achieved of merit, yet this loss, 
Thus far at least recovered, hath much more 




38 PARADISE LOST. 

Established in a safe unenvied throne, 

Yielded with full consent. The happier state 

In Heaven, which follows dignity, might draw 

Envy from each inferior; but who here 

Will envy whom the highest place exposes 

Foremost to stand against the Thunderer's aim 

Your bulwark, and condemns to greatest share 

Of endless pain? Where there is then no good 

For which to strive, no strife can grow up there 

From faction; for none sure will claim in Hell 

Precedence, none whose portion is so small 

Of present pain that with ambitious mind 

Will covet more. With this advantage then 

To union, and firm faith, and firm accord, 

More than can be in Heaven, we now return 

To claim our just inheritance of old, 

Surer to prosper than prosperity 

Could have assured us; and by what best way, 40 

Whether of open war or covert guile, 

We now debate; who can advise may speak." 

He ceased ; and next him Moloch^ sceptred king, 
Stood up, the strongest and the fiercest Spirit 
That fought in Heaven, now fiercer by despair. 
His trust was with the Eternal to be deemed 
Equal in strength, and rather than be less 
Cared not to be at all ; with that care lost 
Went all his fear : of God, or Hell, or worse, 
He recked not, and these words thereafter spake : 50 

" My sentence is for open war : of wiles, 
More unexpert, I boast not: them let those 
Contrive who need, or when they need, not now. 
For while they sit contriving, shall the rest, 
Millions that stand in arms, and longing wait 



BOOK II. 3vj 

The signal to ascend, sit lingering here 
Heaven's fugitives, and for their dwelling-place 
Accept this dark opprobrious den of shame, 
The prison of his tyranny who reigns 
By our delay ? No ! let us rather choose, 60 

Armed with Hell-flames and fury, all at once 
O'er Heaven's high towers to force resistless way, 
Turning our tortures into horrid arms 
Against the Torturer; when to meet the noise 
Of his almighty engine he shall hear 
Infernal thunder, and for lightning see 
Black fire and horror shot with equal rage 
Among his Angels, and his throne itself 
Mixed with Tartarean sulphur and strange fire, 
His own invented torments. But perhaps 70 

The way seems difficult and steep to scale 
With upright wing against a higher foe. 
Let such bethink them, if the sleepy drench 
Of that forgetful lake benumb not still, 
That in our proper motion we ascend 
Up to our native seat; descent and fall 
To us is adverse. Who but felt of late, 
When the fierce foe hung on our broken rear 
Insulting, and pursued us through the deep, 
With what compulsion and laborious flight 80 

We sunk thus low ? The ascent is easy then ; 
The event is feared : should we again provoke 
Our stronger, some worse way his wrath may find 
To our destruction if there be in Hell 
Fear to be worse destroyed ! What can be worse 
Than to dwell here, driven out from bliss, condemned 
In this abhorred deep to utter woe; 
Where pain of unextinguishable fire 



.40 PARADISE LOST. 

Must exercise us without hope of end, 

The vassals of his anger, when the scourge 90 

Inexorably, and the torturing hour, 

Calls us to penance? More destroyed .than thus, 

We should be quite abolished, and expire. 

What fear we then? what doubt we to incense 

His utmost ire? which, to the highth enraged, 

Will either quite consume us, and reduce 

To nothing this essential happier far 

Than miserable to have eternal being ! 

Or if our substance be indeed divine, 

And cannot cease to be, we are at worst 100 

On this side nothing; and by proof we feel 

;Our power sufficient to disturb his Heaven, 

And with perpetual inroads to alarm, 

Though inaccessible, his fatal throne: 

Which, if not victory, is yet revenge." 

He ended frowning, and his look denounced 
Desperate revenge, and battle dangerous 
To less than gods. On the other side up rose 
Belial, in act more graceful and humane ; 
A fairer person lost not Heaven; he seemed no 

For dignity composed, and high exploit. 
But all was false and hollow; though his tongue 
Dropt manna, and could make the worse appear 
The better reason, to perplex and dash 
Maturest counsels : for his thoughts were low ; 
To vice industrious, but to nobler deeds 
Timorous and slothful : yet he pleased the ear, 
And with persuasive accent thus began : 

" I should be much for open war, O Peers, 
As not behind in hate, if what was urged 120 

Main reason to persuade immediate war 



BOOK II. 41 

Did not dissuade me most, and seem to cast 
Ominous conjecture on the whole success; 
When he who most excels in fact of arms, 
In what he counsels and in what excels 
Mistrustful, grounds his courage on despair 
And utter dissolution, as the scope 
Of all his aim, after some dire revenge. 
First, what revenge? The towers of Heaven are filled 
With armed watch, that render all access 130 

Impregnable; oft on the bordering deep 
Encamp their legions, or with obscure wing 
Scout far and wide into the realm of Night, 
Scorning surprise. Or could we break our way 
By force, and at our heels all Hell should rise 
With blackest insurrection, to confound 
Heaven's purest light, yet our great enemy 
All incorruptible would on his throne 
Sit unpolluted, and the ethereal mould 
Incapable of stain would soon expel 140 

Her mischief, and purge off the baser fire, 
Victorious. Thus repulsed, our final hope 
? Is flat despair: we must exasperate 
i f The almighty victor to spend all his rage, 
U And that must end us, that must be our cure 
< To be no more. Sad cure ! for who would lose, 
Though full of pain, this intellectual being, 
Those thoughts that wander through eternity, 
To perish rather, swallowed up and lost 
In the wide womb of uncreated Night, 150 

Devoid of sense and motion? And who knows, 
Let this be good, whether our angry foe 
Can give it, or will ever? How he can 
Is doubtful; that he never will is sure. 



42 PARADISE LOST. 

Will he, so wise, let loose at once his ire, 
Belike through impotence, or unaware, 
To give his enemies their wish, and end 
Them in his anger, whom his anger saves 
To punish endless ? ' Wherefore cease we, then ? ' 
Say they who counsel war; 'we are decreed, 160 

Reserved, and destined to eternal woe; 
Whatever doing, what can we suffer more, 
CjVVhat can we suffer worse ? (C Is this then worst, 
Thus sitting, thus consulting, thus in arms? 
What when we fled amain, pursued and strook 
With Heaven's afflicting thunder, and besought 
The deep to shelter us? this Hell then seemed 
A refuge from those wounds. Or when we lay 
Chained on the burning lake? that sure was 
What if the breath that kindled those grim fires, 170 

Awaked, should blow them into sevenfold rage, 
And plunge us in the flames? or from above 
Should intermitted vengeance arm again 
His red right hand to plague us? What if all 
Her stores were opened, and this firmament 
Of Hell should spout her cataracts of fire, 
Impendent horrors, threatening hideous fall 
One day upon our heads ; while we perhaps, 
Designing or exhorting glorious war, 

Caught in a fiery tempest shall be hurled, 180 

Each on his rock transfixed, the sport and prey 
Of racking whirlwinds, or for ever sunk 
Under yon boiling ocean, wrapt in chains; 
There to converse with everlasting groans, 
Unrespited, unpitied, unreprieved, 
Ages of hopeless end ! This would be worse. 
War therefore, open or concealed, alike 



BOOK II. '47 

My voice dissuades; for what can force or guile 

With him, or who deceive his mind, whose eye 

Views all things at one view? He from Heaven's highth 

All these our motions vain sees and derides, 191 

Not more almighty to resist our might 

Than wise to frustrate all our plots and wiles. 

Shall we then live thus vile, the race of Heaven 

Thus trampled, thus expelled to suffer here 

Chains and these torments? Better these than worse, 

By my advice; since fate inevitable 

Subdues us, and omnipotent decree, 

The victor's will. To suffer, as to do, 

Our strength is equal, nor the law unjust 200 

That so ordains : this was at first resolved, 

If we were wise, against so great a foe 

Contending, and so doubtful what might fall. 

I laugh, when those who at the spear are bold 

And vent'rous, if that fail them, shrink, and fear 

What yet they know must follow to endure 

Exile, or ignominy, or bonds, or pain, 

The sentence of their conqueror. This is now 

Our doom ; which if we can sustain and bear, 

Our supreme foe in time may much remit 210 

His anger, and perhaps, thus far removed, 

Not mind us not offending, satisfied 

With what is punished ; whence these raging fires 

Will slacken, if his breath stir not their flames. 

Our purer essence then will overcome 

Their noxious vapour, or inured not feel, 

Or changed at length, and to the place conformed 

In temper and in nature, will receive 

Familiar the fierce heat, and void of pain ; 

This horror will grow mild, this darkness light; 220 



4 2 PARADISE LOST. 

* Besides what hope the never-ending flight 
Of future days may bring, what chance, what change 
Worth waiting, since our present lot appears 
For happy though but ill, for ill not worst, 
If we procure not to ourselves more woe." 

Thus Belial, with words clothed in reason's garb, 
Counselled ignoble ease, and peaceful sloth, 
Not peace ; and after him thus Mammon spake : 

"Either to disenthrone the King of Heaven 
We war, if war be best, or to regain 230 

Our own right lost : him to unthrone we then 
May hope, when everlasting Fate shall yield 
To fickle Chance, and Chaos judge the strife. 
The former, vain to hope, argues as vain 
The latter; for what place can be for us 
Within Heaven's bound, unless Heaven's Lord supreme 
We overpower? Suppose he should relent 
And publish grace to all, on promise made 
Of new subjection; with what eyes could we 
Stand in his presence humble, and receive 240 

Strict laws imposed, to celebrate his throne 
With warbled hymns, and to his Godhead sing 
Forced Halleluiahs; while he lordly sits 
Our envied sovran, and his altar breathes 

1 Ambrosial oduuTs~and ambrosial flowers, 
Our servile offerings? This must be our task 
In Heaven, this our delight; how wearisome 
Eternity so spent in worship paid 
To whom we hate! Let us not then pursue, 
By force impossible, by leave obtained 250 

Unacceptable, though in Heaven, our state 
J3f splendid vassalage ; but rather seek 
Our own good from ourselves, and from our own 



BOOK II. 

Live to ourselves, though in this vast recess, 
Free, and to none accountable, preferring 

TTarrl lihprfy hpforp ftp, pasy ynlcp.. 

Of servile pomp. Our greatness will appear 
Then most conspicuous, when great things of small, 
Useful of hurtful, prosperous of adverse, 
]We can create, and in what place soe'er 
Thrive under evil, and work ease out of pain 
^Through labour and endurance. This deep world 
Of darkness do we dread? How oft amidst 
Thick clouds and dark doth Heaven's all-ruling Sire 
Choose to reside, his glory unobscured, 
And with the majesty of darkness round 
Covers his throne, from whence deep thunders roar, 
Mustering their rage, and Heaven resembles Hell ! 
As he our darkness, cannot we his light 
Imitate when we please? This desert soil 
Wants not her hidden lustre, gems and gold ; 
Nor want we skill or art, from whence to raise 
Magnificence; and what can Heaven show more? 
Our torments also may in length of time 
Become our elements, these piercing fires 
As soft as now severe, our temper changed 
Into their temper; which must needs remove 
The sensible of pain. All things invite 
To peaceful counsels, and the settled state 
Of order, how in safety best we may 
[Compose our present evils, with regard 
)f what we are and where, dismissing quite 
11 thoughts of war. Ye have what I advise." 
He scarce had finished, when such murmur filled 
le assembly, as when hollow rocks retain 
The sound of blustering winds, which all night long 



-47 



260 



270 



280 



42- PARADISE LOST. 

Had roused the sea, now with hoarse cadence lull 

Seafaring men o'erwatched, whose bark by chance, 

Or pinnace, anchors in a craggy bay 

After the tempest : such applause was heard 290 

As Mammon ended, and his sentence pleased, 

Advising__peace ; for such another field 

TKey~dreaded worse than Hell ; so much the fear 

Of thunder and the sword of Michael 

Wrought still within triem ; and no less desire 

ToTound this Aether empire, which might rise, 

By policy, and long process of time, 

In emulation opposite to Heaven. 

Which when Beelzebub perceived, than whom, 

Satan except, none higher sat, with grave 300 

Aspect he rose, and in his rising seemed 

A pillar of state ; deep on his front engraven 

Deliberation sat and public care; 

And princely counsel in his face yet shone, 

Majestic though in ruin. Sage he stood, 

With Atlantean shoulders fit to bear 

The weight of mightiest monarchies ; his look 

Drew audience and attention still as night 

Or summer's noontide air, while thus he spake: 

"Thrones and imperial Powers, Offspring of Heaven, 
Ethereal Virtues! or these titles now 311 

Must we renounce, and, changing style, be called 
Princes of Hell? for so the popular vote 
Inclines, here to continue, and build up here 
A growing empire doubtless ! while we dream, 
And know not that the King of Heaven hath doomed 
This place our dungeon, not our safe retreat 
Beyond his potent arm, to live exempt 
From Heaven's high jurisdiction, in new league 



BOOK II. 47 

Banded against his throne, but to remain 320 

In strictest bondage, though thus far removed, 
Under the inevitable curb, reserved 
His captive multitude. For he, be sure, 

I In highth or depth, still first and last will reign 
Sole king, and of his kingdom lose no part 
By our revolt, but over Hell extend 
His empire, and with iron sceptre rule 
Us here, as with his golden those in Heaven. 
What sit we then projecting peace and war? 
War hath determined us, and foiled with loss 330 

Irreparable ; terms of peace yet none 
Vouchsafed or sought; for what peace will be given 
To us enslaved, but custody severe, 
And stripes, and arbitrary punishment 
Inflicted? and what peace can we return, 
But, to our power, hostility and hate, 
Untamed reluctance, and revenge, though slow, 
Yet ever plotting how the conqueror least 
May reap his conquest, and may least rejoice 
In doing what we most in suffering feel ? 340 

Nor will occasion want, nor shall we need 
With dangerous expedition to invade 
Heaven, whose high walls fear no assault or siege, 
Or ambush from the deep. What if we find 
Some easier enterprise? There is a place 
(If ancient and prophetic fame in Heaven 
Err not), another world, the happy seat 
Of some new race called Man, about this time 
To be created like to us, though less 
'In power and excellence, but favoured more 350 

Of him who rules above; so was his will 
Pronounced among the gods, and by an oath, 



48 PARADISE LOST. 

, That shook Heaven's whole circumference, confirmed. 

Thither let us bend all our thoughts, to learn 
j What creatures there inhabit, of what mould, 
j Or substance, how endued, and what their power, 
1 And where their weakness, how attempted best, 

By force or subtlety. Though Heaven be shut, 

And Heaven's high Arbitrator sit secure 

In his own strength, this place may lie exposed, 360 

The utmost border of his kingdom, left 

To their defence who hold it; here, perhaps, 

Some advantageous act may be achieved 

By sudden onset : either with Hell-fire 

To waste his whole creation, or possess 
? All as our own, and drive, as we are driven, 

{The puny habitants ; or if not drive, 
Seduce them to our party, that their God 
May prove their foe, and with repenting hand 
Abolish his own works. This would surpass 370 

Common revenge, and interrupt his joy 
In our confusion, and our joy upraise 
In his disturbance; when his darling sons, 
Hurled headlong to partake with us, shall curse 
Their frail original, and faded bliss, 

, Faded so soon ! Advise if this be worth 

: Attempting, or to sit in darkness here 

i, Hatching vain empires." Thus Beelzebub 
Pleaded his devilish counsel, first devised 
By Satan, and in part proposed; for whence, 380 

But from the author of all ill, could spring 
So deep a malice, to confound the race 
Of Mankind in one root, and Earth with Hell 
To mingle and involve, done all to spite 
The great Creator? But their spite still serves 



BOOK II. 49 

His glory to augment. The bold design 
Pleased highly those infernal States, and joy 
Sparkled in all their eyes; with full assent 
They vote : whereat his speech he thus renews : 

"Well have ye judged, well ended long debate, 390 
Synod of gods, and, like to what ye are, 
Great things resolved; which from the lowest deep 
Will once more lift us up, in spite of fate, 
Nearer our ancient seat; perhaps in view 
Of those bright confines, whence, with neighbouring arms 
And opportune excursion, we may chance 
Re-enter Heaven; or else in some mild zone 
Dwell not unvisited of Heaven's fair light, 
Secure, and at the brightening orient beam 
Purge off this gloom ; the soft delicious air, 400 

To heal the scar of these corrosive fires, 
Shall breathe her balm. But first, whom shall we send 
In search of this new world? whom shall we find 
Sufficient? who shall tempt with wandering feet 
The dark, unbottomed, infinite Abyss, 
And through the palpable obscure find out 
His uncouth way, or spread his aery flight, 
Upborne with indefatigable wings 
Over the vast abrupt, ere he arrive 

The happy isle? What strength, what art, can then 410 
Suffice, or what evasion bear him safe 
Through the strict senteries and stations thick 
Of Angels watching round? Here he had need 
All circumspection, and we now no less 
Choice in our suffrage; for on whom we send 
The weight of all, and our last hope, relies." 

This said, he sat ; and expectation held 
His look suspense, awaiting who appeared 

p. L. 4 



50 PARADISE LOST. 

To second, or oppose, or undertake 

t The perilous attempt ; but all sat mute, 420 

j Pondering the danger with deep thoughts; and each 

I In other's countenance read his own dismay, 
Astonished. None among the choice and prime 
Of those Heaven-warring champions could be found 
So hardy as to proffer or accept, 
Alone, the dreadful voyage; till at last 
Satan, whom now transcendent glory raised 
Above his fellows, with monarchal pride 
Conscious of highest worth, unmoved thus spake: 

" O Progeny of Heaven, empyreal Thrones ! 430 

With reason hath deep silence and demur 
Seized us, though undismayed. Long is the way 
And hard, that out of Hell leads up to light; 

j Our prison strong, this huge convex of fire, 

j Outrageous to devour, immures us round 

1 Ninefold, and gates of burning adamant, 

1 Barred over us, prohibit all egress. 
These passed, if any pass, the void profound 
rO Of unessential Night receives him next, 

Wide-gaping, and with utter loss of being 440 

Threatens him, plunged in that abortive gulf. 

If thence he scape into whatever world, 

Or unknown region, what remains him less 

Than unknown dangers and as hard escape? 

But I should ill become this throne, O Peers, 

And this imperial sovranty, adorned 

With splendour, armed with power, if aught proposed 

And judged of public moment, in the shape 

Of difficulty or danger, could deter 

Me from attempting. Wherefore do I assume 450 

These royalties, and not refuse to reign, 



BOOK II. 51 

Refusing to accept as great a share 
Of hazard as of honour, due alike 
To him who reigns, and so much to him due 
Of hazard more, as he above the rest 
High honoured sits? Go therefore, mighty Powers, 
Terror of Heaven, though fallen ; intend at home, 
While here shall be our home, what best may ease 
The present misery, andjender Hell 
More tolerable ; if there be cure or charm 460 

^To respite, or deceive, or slack the pain 
(Of this ill mansion; intermit no watch 
Against a wakeful foe, while I abroad 
Through all the coasts of dark destruction seek 
Deliverance for us all : this enterprise 
None shall partake with me." Thus saying, rose 
The Monarch, and prevented all reply ; 
pmHpntj lest, from his resolution raised, 
Others among the chief might offer now 
(Certain to be refused) what erst they feared, 470 

And, so refused, might .in opinion stand 
His rivals, winning cheap^ the high_ipute 
iVhich he through^ hazard huge must earn. But they 
Dreaded not inore the adventure than his voice 
Forbidding ; and at once with him they rose ; 
Their rising all at once was as the sound 
Of thunder heard remote. Towards him they bend 
With awful reverence prone; and as a god 
him equal to the Highest in Heaven. 
Nor failed they to express how much they praised 480 
That for the general safety he despised 
His own; for neither do the Spirits damned 
Lose all their virtue; lest bad men should boast 
Their specious deeds on Earth, which glory excites, 

42 



VE 



52 PARADISE LOST. 

Or close ambition varnished o'er with zeal. 

Thus they their doubtful consultations dark 
Ended, rejoicing in their matchless Chief: 
As when from mountain-tops the dusky clouds 
Ascending, while the North-wind sleeps, o'erspread 
Heaven's cheerful face, the louring element 490 

Scowls o'er the darkened landskip snow or shower; 
If chance the radiant sun with farewell sweet 
Extend his evening beam, the fields revive, 
The birds their notes renew, and bleating herds 
Attest their joy, that hill and valley rings. 
O shame to men ! Devil with devil damned 
Firm concord holds, men only disagree 
Of creatures rational, though under hope 
Of heavenly grace ; and, God proclaiming peace, 
Yet live in hatred, enmity, and strife 500 

Among themselves, and levy cruel wars, 
Wasting the Earth, each other to destroy: 
As if (which might induce us to accord) 
Man had not hellish foes enow besides, 
That day and night for his destruction wait ! 

The Stygian council thus dissolved ; and forth 
In order came the grand infernal Peers; 
Midst came their mighty Paramount, and seemed 
Alone the antagonist of Heaven, nor less 
Than Hell's dread Emperor, with pomp supreme, 510 
And god-like imitated state; him round 
A globe of fiery Seraphim enclosed 
With bright emblazonry, and horrent arms. 
Then of their session ended they bid cry 
With trumpet's regal sound the great result: 
Toward the four winds four speedy Cherubim 
Put to their mouths the sounding alchymy, 



BOOK II. 53 

By harald's voice explained; the hollow Abyss 

Heard far and wide, and all the host of Hell 

With deafening shout returned them loud acclaim. 520 

Thence more at ease their minds and somewhat raised 

By false presumptuous hope, the ranged powers 

Disband ; and, wandering, each his several way 

Pursues, as inclination or sad choice 

Leads him perplexed, where he may likeliest find 

Truce to his restless thoughts, and entertain 

The irksome hours, till his great Chief return. 

Part on the plain, or in the air sublime, 

Upon the wing or in swift race contend, 

As at the Olympian games or Pyjhian fields ; 530 

Part curb their fiery steeds, or shun the goal 

With rapid wheels, or fronted brigads form : 

As when, to warn proud cities, war appears 

Waged in the troubled sky, and armies rush 

To battle in the clouds; before each van 

Prick forth the aery knights, and couch their spears, 

Till thickest legions close ; with feats of arms 

From either end of Heaven the welkin burns. 

Others, with vast Typhoean rage more fell, 

Rend up both rocks and hills, and ride the air 540 

In whirlwind ; Hell scarce holds the wild uproar : 

As when Alcides, from GEchalia crowned 

With conquest, felt the envenomed robe, and tore 

Through pain up by the roots Thessalian pines, 

And Lichas from the top of (Eta threw 

Into the Euboic sea. Others more mild, 

Retreated in a silent valley, sing 

With notes angelical to many a harp 

Their own heroic deeds and hapless fall 

By doom of battle; and complain that Fate 550 



54 PARADISE LOST. 

Free Virtue should enthrall to Force or Chance. 

Their song was partial, but the harmony 

(What could it less when Spirits immortal sing?) 

Suspended Hell, and took with ravishment 

The thronging audience. In discourse more sweet 

(For eloquence the soul, song charms the sense) 

Others apart sat on a hill retired, 

In thoughts more elevate, and reasoned high 

Of providence, foreknowledge, will, and fate, 

Fixed fate, free will, foreknowledge absolute, 560 

And found no end, in wandering mazes lost. 

Of good and evil much they argued then, 

Of happiness and final misery, 

Passion and apathy, and glory and shame, 

Vain wisdom all, and false philosophy ! 

Yet with a pleasing sorcery could charm 

Pain for a while or anguish, and excite 

Fallacious hope, or arm the obdured breast 

With stubborn patience as with triple steel. 

Another part, in squadrons and gross bands, 570 

On bold adventure to discover wide 

That dismal world, if any clime perhaps 

Might yield them easier habitation, bend 

Four ways their flying march, along the banks 

Of four infernal rivers that disgorge 

Into the burning lake their baleful streams: 

Abhorred Styx, the flood of deadly hate; 

Sad Acheron of sorrow, black and deep; 

Cocytus, named of lamentation loud 

Heard on the rueful stream ; fierce Phlegethon, 580 

Whose waves of torrent fire inflame with rage. 

Far off from these a slow and silent stream, 

Lethe, the river of oblivion, rolls 



BOOK II. 55 

Her watery labyrinth, whereof who drinks 

Forthwith his former state and being forgets, 

Forgets both joy and grief, pleasure and pain. 

Beyond this flood a frozen continent 

Lies dark and wild, beat with perpetual storms 

Of whirlwind and dire hail, which on firm land 

Thaws not, but gathers heap, and ruin seems 590 

Of ancient pile ; all else deep snow and ice, 

A gulf profound as that Serbonian bog 

Betwixt Damiata and Mount Casius old, 

Where armies whole have sunk : the parching air 

Burns frore, and cold performs the effect of fire. 

Thither, by harpy-footed Furies haled, 

At certain revolutions all the damned 

Are brought; and feel by turns the bitter change 

Of fierce extremes, extremes by change more fierce, 

From beds of raging fire to starve in ice 600 

Their soft ethereal warmth, and there to pine 

Immovable, infixed, and frozen round 

Periods of time ; thence hurried back to fire. 

They ferry over this Lethean sound 

Both to and fro, their sorrow to augment, 

And wish and struggle, as they pass, to reach 

The tempting stream, with one small drop to lose 

In sweet forgetfulness all pain and woe, 

All in one moment, and so near the brink ; 

But Fate withstands, and, to oppose the attempt, 610 

Medusa with Gorgonian terror guards 

The ford, and of itself the water flies 

All taste of living wight, as once it fled 

The lip of Tantalus. Thus roving on 

In confused march forlorn, the adventrous bands, 

With shuddering horror pale, and eyes aghast, 



56 PARADISE LOST. 

Viewed first their lamentable lot, and found 

No rest. Through many a dark and dreary vale 

They passed, and many a region dolorous, 

O'er many a frozen, many a fiery Alp, 620 

Rocks, caves, lakes, fens, bogs, dens, and shades of death, 

A universe of death, which God by curse 

Created evil, for evil only good, 

Where all life dies, death lives, and Nature breeds, 

Perverse, all monstrous, all prodigious things, 

Abominable, inutterable, and worse 

Than fables yet have feigned, or fear conceived, 

Gorgons, and Hydras, and Chimseras dire. 

Meanwhile the Adversary of God and Man, 
Satan, with thoughts inflamed of highest design, 630 

Puts on swift wings, and toward the gates of Hell 
Explores his solitary flight; sometimes 
He scours the right'Tiand coast, sometimes the left; 
Now shaves with level wing the deep, then soars 
Up to the fiery concave towering high. 
As when far off at sea a fleet descried 
Hangs in the clouds, by equinoctial winds 
Close sailing from Bengala, or the isles 
Of Ternate and Tidore, whence merchants bring 
Their spicy drugs; they on the trading flood, 640 

Through the wide Ethiopian to the Cape, 
Ply stemming nightly toward the pole : so seemed 
Far off the flying Fiend. At last appear 
Hell-bounds, high reaching to the horrid roof, 
And thrice threefold the gates; three folds were brass, 
Three iron, three of adamantine rock, 
Impenetrable, impaled with circling fire, 
Yet unconsumed. Before the gates there sat 
On either side a formidable Shape. 



BOOK II. 57 

The one seemed woman to the waist, and fair, 650 

I But ended foul in many a scaly fold 
1 Voluminous and vast, a serpent armed 
With mortal sting. About her middle round 
^. cry of Hell-hounds never-ceasing barked 
With wide Cerbergan mouths full loud, and rung 
A hideous peal ; yet, when they list, would creep, 
If aught disturbed their noise, into her womb, 
And kennel there, yet there still barked and howled 
Within unseen. Far less abhorred than these 
Vexed Scylla, bathing in the sea that parts 660 

Calabria from the hoarse Trinacrian shore; 
Nor uglier follow the night-hag, when, called 
In secret, riding through the air she comes, 
Lured with the smell of infant blood, to dance 
With Lapland witches, while the labouring moon 
Eclipses at their charms. The other Shape 
If shape it might be called that shape had none 
Distinguishable in member, joint, or limb; 
Or substance might be called that shadow seemed, 
For each seemed either black it stood as Night, 670 
Fierce as ten Furies, terrible as Hell, 
And shook a dreadful dart; what seemed his head 
The likeness of a kingly crown had on. 
Satan was now at hand, and from his seat 
The monster moving onward came as fast, 
With horrid strides ; Hell trembled as he strode. 
The undaunted Fiend what this might be admired, K'OK 
Admired, not feared God and his Son except, 
Created thing naught valued he nor shunned 
And with disdainful look thus first began : 6So 

"Whence and what art thou, execrable Shape, 
That dar'st, though grim and terrible, advance 



| 



58 PARADISE LOST. 

Thy miscreated front athwart my way 
To yonder gates? Through them I mean to pass, 
That be assured, without leave asked of thee. 
Retire, or taste thy folly, and learn by proof, 
Hell-born, not to contend with Spirits of Heaven." 

To whom the Goblin, full of wrath, replied : 
"Art thou that Traitor- Angel, art thou he, 
j Who first broke peace in Heaven and faith, till then 690 
, Unbroken, and in proud rebellious arms 
! Drew after him the third part of Heaven's sons, 
_ Conjured against the Highest, for which both thou 
And they, outcast from God, are here condemned 
To waste eternal days in woe and pain? 
And reckon'st thou thyself with Spirits of Heaven, 
Hell-doomed, and breath'st defiance here and scorn, 
Where I reign king, and, to enrage thee more, 
Thy king and lord? Back to thy punishment, 
False fugitive, and to thy speed add wings, 700 

Lest with a whip of scorpions I pursue 
Thy lingering, or with one stroke of this dart 
Strange horror seize thee, and pangs unfelt before." 

So spake the grisly Terror, and in shape, 
So speaking and so threatening, grew tenfold 
More dreadful and deform. On the other side, 
Incensed with indignation, Satan stood 
Unterrified, and like a comet burned, 
That fires the length of Ophiuchus huge 
In the arctic sky, and from Els horrid hair 710 

Shakes pestilence and war. Each at the head 
Levelled his deadly aim; their fatal hands 
No second stroke intend ; and such a frown 
Each cast at the other, as when two black clouds, 
With Heaven's artillery fraught, come rattling on 



BOOK II. 59 

Over tiie Caspian, then stand front to front 

Hovering a space, till winds the signal blow 

To join their dark encounter in mid-air : 

So frowned the mighty combatants, that Hell 

Grew darker at their frown; so matched they stood; 720 

For never but once more was either like 

To meet so great a foe. And now great deeds 

Had been achieved, whereof all Hell had rung, 

Had not the snaky Sorceress, that sat 

Fast by Hell-gate and kept the fatal key, 

Risen, and with hideous outcry rushed between. 

"O father, what intends thy hand," she cried, 
"Against thy only son? What fury, O son, 
Possesses thee to bend that mortal dart 
Against thy father's head? and know'st for whom; 730 
For him who sits above, and laughs the while 
At thee ordained his drudge, to execute 
Whate'er his wrath, which he calls justice, bids 
His wrath, which one day will destroy ye both ! " 

She spake, and at her words the hellish Pest 
Forbore; then these to her Satan returned: 

"So strange thy outcry, and thy words so strange 
Thou interposest, that my sudden hand, 
Prevented, spares to tell thee yet by deeds 
What it intends, till first I know of thee 740 

What thing thou art, thus double-formed, and why, 
In this infernal vale first met, thou call'st 
Me father, and that phantasm call'st my son. 
I know thee not, nor ever saw till now 
Sight more detestable than him and thee." 

To whom thus the Portress of Hell-gate replied: 
" Hast thou forgot me then, and do I seem 
Now in thine eye so foul? once deemed so fair 



60 PARADISE LOST. 

1 In .rleaven, when at the assembly, and in sight 
^)f all the Seraphim with thee combined 750 

I In bold conspiracy against Heaven's King, 
All on a sudden miserable pain 
Surprised thee; dim thine eyes, and dizzy swum 
In darkness, while thy head flames thick and fast 
Threw forth, till on the left side opening wide, 
Likest to thee in shape and countenance bright, 
Then shining Heavenly-fair, a goddess armed, 
Out of thy head I sprung. Amazement seized 
All the host of Heaven; back they recoiled afraid 
At first, and called me Sin^ and for a sign 760 

Portentous held me; but, familiar grown, 
I pleased, and with attractive graces won 
The most averse, thee chiefly, who full oft 
Thyself in me thy perfect image viewing 
Becam'st enamoured; and such joy thou took'st 
With me in secret, that my womb conceived 
A growing burden. Meanwhile war arose, 
And fields were fought in Heaven ; wherein remained 
(For what could else?) to our almighty foe 
Clear victory, to our part loss and rout 770 

Through all the Empyrean. Down they fell, 
Driven headlong from the pitch of Heaven, down 
Into this deep, and in the general fall 
I also; at which time this powerful key 
Into my hands was given, with charge to keep 
These gates for ever shut, which none can pass 
Without my opening. Pensive here I sat 
Alone; but long I sat not, till my womb, 
Pregnant by thee, and now excessive grown, 
Prodigious motion felt and rueful throes. 780 

At last this odious offspring whom thou seest, 



BOOK II. 6 1 

Thine own begotten, breaking violent way, 

Tore through my entrails, that, with fear and pain 

Distorted, all my nether shape thus grew 

Transformetl ; but he, my inbred enemy, 

Forth issued, brandishing his fatal dart, 

Made to destroy. I fled, and cried out Death! 

Hell trembled at the hideous name, and sighed 

From all her caves, and back resounded Death ! 

I fled ; but he pursued (though more, it seems, 790 

Inflamed with lust than rage) and, swifter far, 

Me overtook, his mother, all dismayed, 

And, in embraces forcible and foul 

Engendering with me, of that rape begot 

These yelling monsters, that with ceaseless cry 

Surround me, as thou saw'st, hourly conceived 

And hourly born, with sorrow infinite 

To me; for, when they list, into the womb 

That bred them they return, and howl, and gnaw 

My bowels, their repast; then, bursting forth 800 

Afresh, with conscious terrors vex me round, 

That rest or intermission none I find. 

Before mine eyes in opposition sits 

Grim Death, my son and foe, who sets them on, 

And me, his parent, would full soon devour 

For want of other prey, but that he knows 

His end with mine involved, and knows that I 

Should prove a bitter morsel, and his bane, 

Whenever that shall be ; so Fate pronounced. 

But thou, O father, I forewarn thee, shun 810 

His deadly arrow ; neither vainly hope 

TcTbe invulnerable in those bright arms, 

Though tempered heavenly; for that mortal dint, 

Save he who reigns above, none can resist." 




62 PARADISE LOST. 

She finished ; and the subtle Fiend his lore 
Soon learned, now milder, and thus answered smooth: 

"Dear daughter since thou claim'st me for thy sire, 
And my jajr son here show'st me, the dear pledge 
Of dalliance had with thee in Heaven, and joys 
Then sweet, now sad to mention, through dire change 820 
Befallen us unforeseen, unthought of know, 
I come no enemy, but to set free 
From out this dark and dismal house of pain 
Both him and thee, and all the Heavenly host 
Of Spirits that, in our just pretences armed, 
Fell with us from on high. From them I go 
This uncouth errand sole, and one for all 
Myself expose, with lonely steps to tread 
The unfounded deep, and through the void immense 
To search with wandering quest a place foretold 830 

Should be, and, by concurring signs, ere now 
Created vast and round, a place of bliss 
In the purlieus of Heaven, and therein placed 
A race of upstart creatures, to supply 
Perhaps our vacant room, though more removed, 
Lest Heaven, surcharged with potent multitude, 
Might hap to move new broils. Be this, or aught 
Than this more secret, now designed, I haste 
To know; and, this once known, shall soon return, 
And bring ye to the place where thou and Death 840 
Shall dwell at ease, and up and down unseen 
Wing silently the buxom air, embalmed 
With odours : there ye shall be fed and filled 
Immeasurably; all things shall be your prey." 

He ceased, for both seemed highly pleased, and Death 
Grinned horrible a ghastly smile, to hear 
His famine should be filled, and blessed his maw 



BOOK II. 63 

Destined to that good hour. No less rejoiced 
His mother bad, and thus bespake her sire : 

"The key of this infernal pit, by due 850 

And by command of Heaven's all-powerful King, 
I keep, by him forbidden to unlock 
These adamantine gates; against all force 
Death ready stands to interpose his dart, 
Fearless to be o'ermatched by living might. 
But what owe I to his commands above, 
Who hates me, and hath hither thrust me down 
Into this gloom of Tartarus profound, 
To sit in hateful office here confined, 
Inhabitant of Heaven and Heavenly-born, 860 

Here in perpetual agony and pain, 
With terrors and with clamours compassed round 
Of mine own brood, that on my bowels feed? 
Thou art my father, thou my author, thou 
My being gav'st me; whom should I obey 
But thee? whom follow? Thou wilt bring me soon 
To that new world of .light and bliss, among 
The gods who live at ease, where I shall reign 
At thy right hand voluptuous, as beseems 
Thy daughter and thy darling, without end." 870 

Thus saying, from her side the fatal key, 
Sfad instrument of all our woe, she took; 
And, towards the gate rolling her bestial train, 
Forthwith the huge portcullis high up-drew, 
Which but herself not all the StygiajL-Powers 
Could once have moved; then in the key-hole turns 
The intricate wards, and every bolt and bar 
Of massy iron or solid rock with ease 
Unfastens : on a sudden open fly, 
With impetuous recoil and jarring sound, 880 



64 PARADISE LOST. 

The infernal doors, and on their hinges grate 
Harsh thunder, that the lowest bottom shook 
Of Erebus. She opened, but to shut 
Excelled her power; the gates wide open stood, 
That with extended wings a bannered host, 
Under spread ensigns marching, might pass through 
With horse and chariots ranked in loose array; 
So wide they stood, and like a furnace-mouth 
Cast forth redounding smoke and ruddy flame. 

f Before their eyes in sudden view appear 890 

( The secrets of the hoary deep, a dark 
*  Illimitable ocean, without bound, 

 Without dimension; where length, breadth, and highth, 

I And time, and place, are lost; where eldest Night 

 And Chaos, ancestors of Nature, hold 
Eternal anarchy, amidst the noise 
Of endless wars, and by confusion stand. 
For Hot, Cold, Moist, and Dry, four champions fierce, 
Strive here for mastery, and to battle bring 
Their embryon atoms; they around the flag 900 

Of each his faction, in their several clans, 
Light-armed or heavy, sharp, smooth, swift, or slow, 
Swarm populous, unnumbered as the sands 
Of Barca or Gyrene's torrid soil, 
Levied to side with warring winds, and poise 
Their lighter wings. To whom these most adhere 
He rules a moment; Qiaos umpire sits, 
And by decision more emEroils the fray 
By which he reigns; next him, high arbiter, 
CJiance governs all. Into this wild Abyss, 910 

The womb of Nature, and perhaps her grave, 
Of neither sea, nor shore, nor air, nor fire, 
But all these in their pregnant causes mixed 



BOOK II. 65 

Confusedly, and which thus must ever fight, 

Unless the Almighty Maker them ordain 

His dark materials to create more worlds 

Into this wild Abyss the wary Fiend 

Stood on the brink of Hell and looked a while, 

Pondering his voyage; for no narrow frith 

He had to cross. Nor was his ear less pealed 920 

With noises loud and ruinous (to compare 

Great things with small) than when Bellona storms, 

With all her battering engines bent tcTrase"" 

Some capital city; or less than if this frame 

Of Heaven were falling, and these elements 

In mutiny had from her axle torn 

The steadfast Earth. At last his sail-broad vans 

He spreads for flight, and in the surging smoke 

Uplifted spurns the ground; thence many a league, 

As in a cloudy chair, ascending rides 930 

Audacious; but, that seat soon failing, meets 

A vast vacuity : all unawares, 

Fluttering his pennons vain, plumb-down he drops 

Ten thousand fathom deep, and to this hour 

Down had been falling, had not by ill chance 

The strong rebuff of some tumultuous cloud, 

Instinct with fire and nitre, hurried him 

As many miles aloft ; that fury stayed 

Quenched in a boggy Syrtis, neither sea, 

Nor. good dry land nigh foundered, on he fares, 940 

Treading the crude consistence, half on foot, 

Half flying; behoves him now both oar and sail. 

As when a gryphon through the wilderness 

With winged course, o'er hill or moory dale, p 

Pursues the Arimaspian, who by stealth 

Had from his wakeful custody purloined 

p. L. c 



66 PARADISE LOST. 

The guarded gold : so eagerly the Fiend 

O'er bog or steep, through strait, rough, dense, or rare, 

With head, hands, wings, or feet, pursues his way, 

And swims, or sinks, or wades, or creeps, or flies. 950 

At length a universal hubbub wild 

Of stunning sounds and voices all confused, 

Borne through the hollow dark, assaults his ear 

With loudest vehemence. Thither he plies 

Undaunted, to meet there whatever Power 

Or Spirit of the nethermost Abyss 

Might in that noise reside, of whom to ask 

Which way the nearest coast of darkness lies 

Bordering on light; when straight behold the throne 

Of Chaos, and his dark pavilion spread 960 

Wide on the wasteful Deep! With him enthroned 

Sat sable-vested Night, eldest of things, 

The consort of his reign ; and by them stood 

Orcus and Ades, and the dreaded name 

Of Demogorgon; Rumour next and Chance, 

And Tumult and Confusion all embroiled, 

And Discord with a thousand various mouths. 

To whom Satan, turning boldly, thus : " Ye Powers 
And Spirits of this nethermost Abyss, 
Chaos and ancient Night, I come no spy, 970 

With purpose to explore or to disturb 
The secrets of your realm ; but, by constraint 
Wandering this darksome desert, as my way 
Lies through your spacious empire up to light, 
Alone and without guide, half lost, I seek, 
What readiest path leads where your gloomy bounds 
Confine with Heaven ; or if some other place, 
From your dominion won, the Ethereal King 
Possesses lately, thither to arrive 



BOOK II. 



6 7 



I travel this profound. Direct my course : 980 

Directed, no mean recompense it brings 

To your behoof, if I that region lost, 

All usurpation thence expelled, reduce 

To her original darkness and your sway 

(Which is my present journey), and once more 

Erect the standard there of ancient Night 

Yours be the advantage all, mine the revenge !" 

Thus Satan ; and him thus the Anarch old, 
With faltering speech and visage incomposed, 
Answered: "I know thee, stranger, who thou art, 990 
That mighty leading Angel, who of late 
Made head against Heaven's King, though overthrown. 
I saw and heard ; for such a numerous host 
Fled not in silence through the frighted deep, 
With ruin upon ruin, rout on rout, 
Confusion worse confounded; and Heaven-gates 
Poured out by millions her victorious bands, 
Pursuing. I upon my frontiers here 
Keep residence ; if all I can will serve 
That little which is left so to defend, 1000 

Encroached on still through our intestine broils 
Weakening the sceptre of old Night : first Hell, 
Your dungeon, stretching far and wide beneath; 
Now lately Heaven and Earth, another world 
Hung o'er my realm, linked in a golden chain 
To that side Heaven from whence your legions fell. 
If that way be your walk, you have not far; 
So much the nearer danger. Go, and speed! 
Havoc, and spoil, and ruin, are my gain." 

He ceased; and Satan stayed not to reply, 1010 

But, glad that now his sea should find a shore, 
With fresh alacrity and force renewed 

52 



68 PARADISE LOST. 

Springs upward, like a pyramid of fire, 

Into the wild expanse, and through the shock 

Of fighting elements, on all sides round 

Environed, wins his way; harder beset 

And more endangered, than when Argo passed 

Through Bosporus betwixt the justling rocks; 

Or when Ulysses on the larboard shunned 

Charybdis, and by the other whirlpool steered : 1020 

So he with difficulty and labour hard 

Moved on : with difficulty and labour he ; 

But, he once passed, soon after, when Man fell, 

Strange alteration ! Sin and Death amain, 

Following his track (such was the will of Heaven) 

Paved after him a broad and beaten way 

Over the dark Abyss, whose boiling gulf 

Tamely endured a bridge of wondrous length, 

From Hell continued, reaching the utmost orb 

Of this frail world; by which the Spirits perverse 1030 

With easy intercourse pass to and fro 

To tempt or punish mortals, except whom 

God and good Angels guard by special grace. 

But now at last the sacred influence 
Of light appears, and from the walls of Heaven 
Shoots far into the bosom of dim Night 
A glimmering dawn. Here Nature first begins 
Her farthest verge, and Chaos to retire, 
As from her outmost works, a broken foe, 
With tumult less and with less hostile din ; 1040 

That Satan with less toil, and now with ease, 
Wafts on the calmer wave by dubious light, 
And, like a weather-beaten vessel, holds 
Gladly the port, though shrouds and tackle torn; 
Or in the emptier waste, resembling air, 



BOOK II. 69 

Weighs his spread wings, at leisure to behold 

Far off the empyreal Heaven, extended wide 

In circuit, undetermined square or round, 

With opal towers and battlements adorned 

Of living sapphire, once his native seat; 1050 

And fast by, hanging in a golden chain, 

This pendent world, in bigness as a star 

Of smallest magnitude close by the moon. 

Thither, full fraught with mischievous revenge, 

Accurst, and in a cursed hour, he hies. 



BOOK III. 



THE ARGUMENT. 

God, sitting on his throne, sees Satan flying towards this World, 
then newly created; shows him to the Son, who sat at his right hand; 
foretells the success of Satan in perverting mankind; clears his own 
justice and wisdom from all imputation, having created Man free, and 
able enough to have withstood his Tempter; yet declares his purpose of 
grace towards him, in regard he fell not of his own malice, as did 
Satan, but by him seduced. The Son of God renders praises to his 
Father for the manifestation of his gracious purpose towards Man ; but 
God again declares that grace cannot be extended towards Man without 
the satisfaction of Divine Justice : Man hath offended the majesty of 
God by aspiring to Godhead, and therefore, with all his progeny, 
devoted to death, must die, unless some one can be found sufficient to 
answer for his offence, and undergo his punishment. The Son of God 
freely offers himself a ransom for Man : the Father accepts him, ordains 
his incarnation, pronounces his exaltation above all names in Heaven and 
Earth ; commands all the Angels to adore him : they obey, and, hymning 
to their harps in full quire, celebrate the Father and the Son. Mean- 
while Satan alights upon the bare convex of this World's outermost 
orb; where wandering he first finds a place since called the Limbo of 
Vanity; what persons and things fly up thither: thence comes to the 
gate of Heaven, described ascending by stairs, and the waters above the 
firmament that flow about it. His passage thence to the orb of the 
Sun: he finds there Uriel, the regent of that orb, but first changes 
himself into the shape of a meaner Angel, and pretending a zealous 
desire to behold the new Creation, and Man whom God had placed 
here, inquires of him the place of his habitation, and is directed : alights 
first on Mount Niphates. 



BOOK III. 

HAIL, holy Light, offspring of Heaven first-born! 
Or of the Eternal coeternal beam 
May I express thee unblamed? since God is light, 
And never but in unapproached light 
Dwelt from eternity, dwelt then in thee, 
Bright effluence of bright essence increate! 
Or hear'st thou rather pure Ethereal stream, 
Whose fountain who shall tell? Before the sun, 
Before the Heavens, thou wert, and at the voice 
Of God, as with a mantle, didst invest 10 

The rising World of waters dark and deep, 
Won from the void and formless infinite! 
Thee I revisit now with bolder wing, 
EscagedLlhe.-. Stygian pool, though long detained 
In that obscure sojourn, while in my flight, 
Through utter and through middle darkness borne, 
With other notes than to the Orphean lyre 
I sung of Chaos and eternal Night; 
Taught by trie Heavenly Muse to venture down 
The dark descent, and up to re-ascend, 20 

Though hard and rare : thee I revisit safe, 
And feel thy sovran vital lamp ; but thou 



74 PARADISE LOST. 

Revisit'st not these eyes, that roll in vain 

To find thy piercing ray, and find no dawn; 

So thick a drop serene hath quenched their orbs, 

Or dim suffusion veiled. Yet not the more 

Cease I to wander where the Muses haunt 

Clear spring, or shady grove, or sunny hill, 

Smit with the love of sacred song; but chief 

Thee, Sion, and the flowery brooks beneath, 30 

That wash thy hallowed feet, and warbling flow, 

Nightly I visit; nor sometimes forget 

Those other two equalled with me in fate, 

So were I equalled with them in renown, 

Blind Thamyris and blind Masonides, 

And Tiresias and Phmeus T prophets old: 

Then feed on thoughts that voluntary move 

Harmonious numbers ; as the wakeful bird 

Sings darkling, and in shadiest covert hid 

Tunes her nocturnal note. Thus with the year 40 

Seasons return; but not to me returns 

Day, or the sweet approach of even or morn, 

Or sight of vernal bloom, or summer's rose, 

Or flocks, or herds, or human face divine; 

But cloud instead and ever-during dark 

Surrounds me, from the cheerful ways of men 

Cut off, and, for the book of knowledge fair, 

Presented with a universal blank 

Of Nature's works, to me expunged and rased, 

And wisdom at one entrance quite shut out. 50 

So much the rather thou, celestial Light, 

Shine inward, and the mind through all her powers 

Irradiate : there plant eyes, all mist from thence 

Purge and disperse, that I may see and tell 

Of things invisible to mortal sight. 



BOOK III. 75 

Now had the Almighty Father from above, 
From the pure Empyrean where he sits 
High throned above all highth, bent down his eye, 
His own works and their works at once to view : 
About him all the Sanctities of Heaven 60 

Stood thick as stars, and from his sight received 
Beatitude past utterance; on his right 
TheradiantiiTiage of his ^glory-sat, 
His only Son. On Earth he first beheld 
Our two first 'parents, yet the only two 
Of mankind, in the Happy Garden placed, 
Reaping immortal fruits of joy and love, 
Uninterrupted joy, unrivalled love, 
In blissful solitude. He then surveyed 
Hell and the gulf between, and Satan there, 70 

Coasting the wall of Heaven on this side Night 
In the dun air sublime, and ready now 
To stoop with wearied wings and willing feet 
On the bare outside of this World, that seemed 
Firm land imbosomed without firmament, 
Uncertain which, in ocean or in air. 
Him God beholding from his prospect high, 
Wherein past, present, future, he beholds, 
Thus to his only Son foreseeing spake: 

" Onlyj-begotten Son, seest thou what rage 80 

fljr Af1vprc;gry_?_wjinm ru 



Prescribed, no bars of Hell, nor all the chains 
' Heaped on him there, nor yet the main Abyss 
| Wide interrupt, can hold ; so bent he seems 
On desperate revenge, that shall redound 
I Upon his own rebellious head. And now, 
'Through all restraint broke loose, he wings his way 
Not far off Heaven, in the precincts of light, 



6 PARADISE LOST. 

f Directly towards the new-created World, 

" And Man there placed, with purpose to assay 90 

If him by force he can destroy, or, worse, 
By some false guile pervert : and shall pervert ; 
For Man will hearken to his glozing lies, 
And easily transgress the sole command, 
Sole pledge of his obedience; so will fall 
He and his faithless progeny. Tvhose fault? 
Whose but his own? Ingrate, he had of me 
All he could have; I made him just and right, 
Sufficient to have stood, though free to fall. 
Such I created all the ethereal powers 100 

And Spirits, both them who stood and them who failed : 
Freely they stood who stood, and fell who fell. 
Not free, what proof could they have given sincere 
Of true allegiance, constant faith, or love, 
Where only what they needs must do appeared, 
Not what they would? what praise could they receive, 
What pleasure I, from such obedience paid, 
When will and reason reason also is choice- 
Useless and vain, of freedom both despoiled, 
Made passive both, had served necessity, no 

Not me?J They therefore, as to right belonged, 
So were created, nor can justly accuse 
Their Maker, or their making, or their fate, 
As if predestination overruled 
Their will, disposed by absolute decree 
Or high foreknowledge. They themselves decreed 
Their own revolt, not I : if I foreknew, 
Foreknowledge had no influence on their fault, 
Which had no less proved certain unforeknown. 
So without least impulse or shadow of fate, 120 

Or aught by me immutably foreseen, 



BOOK III. 77 

They trespass, authors to themselves in all, 
Both what they judge and what they choose; for so 
I formed them free, and free they must remain 
Till they enthrall themselves : I else must change 
Their nature, and revoke the high decree 
Unchangeable, eternal, which ordained 
Their freedom ; they themselves ordained their fall. 
The first sort by their own suggestion fell,.- 
Self-tempted, self-depraved ; JVlan. Jalls^.. deceived 130 

By the other first: Man therefore- -shall find grace; 
ThejDther, none. In mercy and justice both,. 
Through Heaven and Earth, so shall my glory excel; 
.But mercy, first and last, shall brightest shine." 

Thus while God spake ambrosial fragrance filled 
All Heaven, and in the blessed Spirits elect 
Sense of new joy ineffable diffused. 
Beyond compare the Son of God was seen 
Most glorious; in him all his Father shone 
Substantially expressed ; and in his face 140 

Divine compassion visibly appeared, 
Love without end, and without measure grace; 
Which uttering, thus he to his Father spake : 

"O Father, gracious was that word which closed 
Thy sovran sentence, that Man should find grace; 
For which both Heaven and Earth shall high extol 
Thy praises, with the innumerable sound 
Of hymns and sacred songs, wherewith thy throne 
Encompassed shall resound thee ever blest. 
For should Man finally be lost, should Man, 150 

Thy creature late so loved, thy youngest son, 
Fall circumvented thus by fraud, though joined 
With his own folly? that be from thee far, 
That far be from thee, Father, who art judge 



78 PARADISE LOST. 

Of all things made, and judgest only right! 

Or shall the Adversary thus obtain 

His end, and frustrate thine? shall he fulfil 

His malice, and thy goodness bring to naught? 

Or proud return, though to his heavier doom, 

Yet with revenge accomplished, and to Hell 160 

Draw after him the whole race of mankind, 

By him corrupted? or wilt thou thyself 

Abolish thy creation, and unmake, 

For him, what for thy glory thou hast made? 

So should thy goodness and thy greatness both 

Be questioned and blasphemed without defence." 

To whom the great Creator thus replied : 
"O Son, in whom my soul hath chief delight, 
Son of my bosom, Son who art alone 
My word, my wisdom, and effectual might, 170 

All hast thou spoken as my thoughts are, all 
As my eternal purpose hath decreed. 
Man shall not quite be lost, but saved who will; 
Yet not of will in him, but grace in me 
Freely vouchsafed. Once more I will renew 
His lapsed powers, though forfeit, and enthralled 
By sin to foul exorbitant desires : 
Upheld by me, yet once more he shall stand 
On even ground against his mortal foe; 
By me upheld, that he may know how frail 180 

His fallen condition is, and to me owe 
All his deliverance, and to none but me. 
Some I have chosen of peculiar grace, 
Elect above the rest ; so is my will : 
The rest shall hear me call, and oft be warned 
Their sinful state, and to appease betimes 
The incensed Deity, while offered grace 



BOOK III. 79 

Invites; for I will clear their senses dark, 
What may suffice, and soften stony hearts 
To pray, repent, and bring obedience due. 190 

To prayer, repentance, and obedience due, 
Though but endeavoured with sincere intent, 
Mine ear shall not be slow, mine eye not shut. 
And I will place within them as a guide 
My umpire Conscience; whom if they will hear, 
Light after light well used they shall attain, 
And to the end persisting safe arrive. 
This my long sufferance and my day of grace 
They who neglect and scorn shall never taste; 
But hard be hardened, blind be blinded more, 200 

That they may stumble on, and deeper fall; 
And none but such from mercy I exclude. 
But yet all is not done. Man, disobeying, 
Disloyal breaks his fealty, and sins 
Against the high supremacy of Heaven, 
Affecting Godhead, and so, losing all, 
To expiate his treason . hath naught left, 
But, to destruction sacred and devote, 
He with his whole posterity must die- 
Die he or justice must; unless for him 210 
Some other, able and as willing, pay 
The rigid satisfaction, death for death. 
Say, Heavenly powers, where shall we find such love? 
Which of ye will be mortal, to redeem 
Man's mortal crime, and just the unjust to save? 
Dwells in all Heaven charity so dear?" 

He asked, but all the Heavenly quire stood mute, 
And silence was in Heaven : on Man's behalf 
Patron or intercessor none appeared 
Much less that durst upon his own head draw 220 



80 PARADISE LOST. 

The deadly forfeiture, and ransom set. 

And now without redemption all mankind 

Must have been lost, adjudged to Death and Hell 

By doom severe, had not the Son of God, 

In whom the fulness dwells of love divine, 

His dearest mediation thus renewed : 

" Father, thy word is passed, Man shall find grace ; 
And shall grace not find means, that finds her way, 
The speediest of thy winged messengers, 
To Visit all thy creatures, and to all 230 

Comes unprevented, unimplored, unsought? 
Happy for Man, so coming ! He her aid 
Can never seek, once dead in sins and lost; 
Atonement for himself, or offering meet, 
Indebted and undone, hath none to bring. 
Behold me, then : me for him, life for life, 
I offer; on me let thine anger fall; 
Account me Man : I for his sake will leave 
Thy bosom, and this glory next to thee 
Freely put off, and for him lastly die 240 

Well pleased ; on me let Death wreak all his rage : 
Under his gloomy power I shall not long 
Lie vanquished : thou hast given me to possess 
Life in myself for ever ; by thee I live ; 
Though now to Death I yield, and am his due, 
All that of me can die, yet, that debt paid, 
Thou wilt not leave me in the loathsome grave, 
His prey, nor suffer my unspotted soul 
For ever with corruption there to dwell; 
But I shall rise victorious, and subdue 250 

My vanquisher, spoiled of his vaunted spoil. 
Death his death's wound shall then receive, and stoop 
Inglorious, of his mortal sting disarmed; 






BOOK III. 8 1 

I through the ample air in triumph high 

Shall lead Hell captive maugre Hell, and show 

The powers of Darkness bound. Thou, at the sight 

Pleased, out of Heaven shalt look down and smile, 

While, by thee raised, I ruin all my foes, 

Death last, and with his carcase glut the grave; 

Then, with the multitude of my redeemed, 260 

Shall enter Heaven, long absent, and return. 

Father, to see thy face, wherein no cloud 

Of anger shall remain, but peace assured 

And reconcilement : wrath shall be no more 

Thenceforth, but in thy presence joy entire." 

His words here ended; but his meek aspect 
Silent yet spake, and breathed immortal love 
To mortal men, above which only shone 
Filial obedience : as a sacrifice 

Glad to be offered, he attends the will 270 

Of his great Father. Admiration seized 
All Heaven, what this might mean, and whither tend, 
Wondering ; but soon the Almighty thus replied : 

" O thou in Heaven and Earth the only peace 
Found out for mankind under wrath, O thou 
My sole complacence ! well thou know'st how dear 
To me are all my works ; nor Man the least, 
Though last created, that for him I spare 
Thee from my bosom and right hand, to save, 
By losing thee a while, the whole race lost ! 280 

Thou therefore, whom thou only canst redeem, 
Their nature also to thy nature join; 
And be thyself Man among men on Earth, 
Made flesh, when time shall be, of virgin seed, 
By wondrous birth; be thou in Adam's room 
The head of all mankind, though Adam's son. 

P. L. < 



82 PARADISE LOST. 

As in him perish all men, so in thee, 

As from a second root, shall be restored 

As many as are restored ; without thee, none. 

His crime makes guilty all his sons; thy merit, 290 

Imputed, shall absolve them who renounce 

Their own both righteous and unrighteous deeds, 

And live in thee transplanted, and from thee 

Receive new life. So Man, as is most just, 

Shall satisfy for Man, be judged and die, 

And dying rise, and rising with him raise 

His brethren, ransomed with his own dear life. 

So Heavenly love shall outdo Hellish hate, 

Giving to death, and dying to redeem, 

So dearly to redeem what Hellish hate 300 

So easily destroyed, and still destroys 

In those who, when they may, accept not grace. 

Nor shalt thou, by descending to assume 

Man's nature, lessen or degrade thine own. 

Because thou hast, though throned in highest bliss 

Equal to God, and equally enjoying 

God-like fruition, quitted all to save 

A world from utter loss, and hast been found 

By merit more than birthright Son of God 

Found worthiest to be so by being good, 310 

Far more than great or high ; because in thee 

Love hath abounded more than glory abounds; 

Therefore thy humiliation shall exalt 

With thee thy manhood also to this throne : 

Here shalt thou sit incarnate, here shalt reign 

Both God and Man, Son both of God and Man, 

Anointed universal King. All power 

I give thee; reign for ever, and assume 

Thy merits; under thee, as Head supreme, 



BOOK III. 83 

Thrones, Princedoms, Powers, Dominions, I reduce: 320 

All knees to thee shall bow of them that bide 

In Heaven, or Earth, or under Earth in Hell. 

When thou, attended gloriously from Heaven, 

Shalt in the sky appear, and from thee send 

The summoning Archangels to proclaim 

Thy dread tribunal, forthwith from all winds 

The living, and forthwith the cited dead 

Of all past ages, to the general doom 

Shall hasten : such a peal shall rouse their sleep. 

Then, all thy Saints assembled, thou shalt judge 330 

Bad men and Angels; they arraigned shall sink 

Beneath thy sentence ; Hell, her numbers full, 

Thenceforth shall be for ever shut. Meanwhile 

The World shall burn, and from her ashes spring 

New Heaven and Earth, wherein the just shall dwell, 

And after all their tribulations long 

See golden days, fruitful of golden deeds, 

With Joy and Love triumphing, and fair Truth. 

Then thou thy regal sceptre shalt lay by, 

For regal sceptre then no more shall need; 340 

God shall be all in all. But all ye gods, 

Adore him who, to compass all this, dies; 

Adore the Son, and honour him as me." 

No sooner had the Almighty ceased, but all 
The multitude of Angels, with a shout 
Loud as from numbers without number, sweet 
As from blest voices, uttering joy Heaven rung 
With jubilee, and loud hosannas filled 
The eternal regions. Lowly reverent 

Towards either throne they bow, and to the ground 350 
With solemn adoration down they cast 
Their crowns inwove with amarant and gold : 

62 



84 PARADISE LOST. 

Immortal amarant, a flower which once 
In Paradise, fast by the Tree of Life, 
Began to bloom, but soon for Man's offence 
To Heaven removed, where first it grew, there grows 
And flowers aloft, shading the Fount of Life, 
And where the River of Bliss through midst of Heaven 
Rolls o'er Elysian flowers her amber stream. 
With these that never fade the Spirits elect 360 

Bind their resplendent locks inwreathed with beams. 
Now in loose garlands thick thrown off, the bright 
Pavement, that like a sea of jasper shone, 
Impurpled with celestial roses smiled. 
Then, crowned again, their golden harps they took, 
Harps ever tuned, that glittering by their side 
Like quivers hung; and with preamble sweet 
Of charming symphony they introduce 
Their sacred song, and waken raptures high : 
No voice exempt, no voice but well could join 370 

Melodious part; such concord is in Heaven. 
Thee, Father, first they sung, Omnipotent, 

' Immutable, Immortal, Infinite, 
Eternal King ; thee, Author of all being, 
Fountain of light, thyself invisible 

' Amidst the glorious brightness where thou sitt'st 
Throned inaccessible, but when thou shadest 
The full blaze of thy beams, and through a cloud 
Drawn round about thee like a radiant shrine 
Dark with excessive bright thy skirts appear, 380 

Yet dazzle Heaven, that brightest Seraphim 
Approach not, but with both wings veil their eyes. 
Thee next they sang, of all creation first, 
Begotten Son, Divine Similitude, 
In whose conspicuous countenance, without cloud 



BOOK III. 85 

Made visible, the Almighty Father shines, 

Whom else no creature can behold : on thee 

Impressed the effulgence of his glory abides ; 

Transfused on thee his ample Spirit rests. 

He Heaven of Heavens, and all the powers therein, 390 

By thee created; and by thee threw down 

The aspiring Dominations. Thou that day 

Thy Father's dreadful thunder didst not spare, 

Nor stop thy flaming chariot-wheels, that shook 

Heaven's everlasting frame, while o'er the necks 

Thou drov'st of warring Angels disarrayed. 

Back from pursuit, thy powers with loud acclaim 

Thee only extolled, Son of thy Father's might, 

To execute fierce vengeance on his foes; 

Not so on Man; him, through their malice fallen, 400 

Father of mercy and grace, thou didst not doom 

So strictly, but much more to pity incline. 

No sooner did thy dear and only Son 

Perceive thee purposed not to doom frail Man 

So strictly, but much more to pity inclined, 

He, to appease thy wrath, and end the strife 

Of mercy and justice in thy face discerned, 

Regardless of the bliss wherein he sat 

Second to thee, offered himself to die 

For Man's offence. O unexampled love ! 410 

Love nowhere to be found less than divine! 

Hail, Son of God, Saviour of men ! Thy name 

Shall be the copious matter of my song 

Henceforth, and never shall my harp thy praise 

Forget, nor from thy Father's praise disjoin ! 

Thus they in Heaven, above the starry sphere, 
Their happy hours in joy and hymning spent. 
Meanwhile, upon the firm opacous globe 



86 PARADISE LOST. 

Of this round World, whose first convex divides 

The luminous inferior orbs, enclosed 420 

From Chaos and the inroad of Darkness old, 

Satan alighted walks. A globe far off 

It seemed; now seems a boundless continent, 

Dark, waste, and wild, under the frown of Night 

Starless exposed, and ever-threatening storms 

Of Chaos blustering round, inclement sky; 

Save on that side which from the wall of Heaven, 

Though distant far, some small reflection gains 

Of glimmering air less vexed with tempest loud : 

Here walked the Fiend at large in spacious field. 430 

As when a vulture on Imaus bred, 

Whose snowy ridge the roving Tartar bounds, 

Dislodging from a region scarce of prey, 

To gorge the flesh of lambs or yeanling kids 

On hills where flocks are fed, flies toward the springs 

Of Ganges or Hydaspes, Indian streams; 

BuTm his* way tignTson the barren plains 

Of Sericana, where Chineses drive 

With sails and wind their cany waggons light: 

So, on this windy sea of land, the Fiend 440 

Walked up and down alone, bent on his prey; 

Alone, for other creature in this place, 

Living or lifeless, to be found was none 

None yet; but store hereafter from the Earth 

Up hither like aerial vapours flew 

Of all things transitory and vain, when sin 

With vanity had filled the works of men : 

Both all things vain, and all who in vain things 

Built their fond hopes of glory or lasting fame, 

Or happiness in this or the other life. 450 

All who have their reward on earth, the fruits 



BOOK III. 87 

Of painful superstition and blind zeal, 

Naught seeking but the praise of men, here find 

Fit retribution, empty as their deeds; 

All the unaccomplished works of Nature's hand, 

Abortive, monstrous, or unkindly mixed, 

Dissolved on Earth, fleet hither, and in vain, 

Till final dissolution, wander here; 

Not in the neighbouring moon, as some have dreamed : 

Those argent fields more likely habitants, 460 

Translated saints, or middle Spirits, hold, 

Betwixt the angelical and human kind. 

Hither, of ill-joined sons and daughters born, 

First from the ancient world those giants came, 

With many a vain exploit, though then renowned; 

The builders next of Babel on the plain 

Of Sennaar, and still with vain design 

New Babels, had they wherewithal, would build; 

Others came single : he who, to be deemed 

A god, leaped fondly into ^Etna flames, 470 

Empedocles ; and he who, to enjoy 

Plato's Elysium, leaped into the sea, 

Cleombrptiis,; and many more, too long, 

Embryos and idiots, eremites and friars, 

White, black, and grey, with all their trumpery. 

Here pilgrims roam, that strayed so far to seek 

In Golgotha him dead who lives in Heaven; 

And they who, to be sure of Paradise, 

Dying put on the weeds of Dominic, 

Or in Franciscan think to pass disguised. 480 

They pass the planets seven, and pass the fixed, 

And that crystalline sphere whose balance weighs 

The trepidation talked, and that first moved; 

And now Saint Peter at Heaven's wicket seems 



88 PARADISE LOST. 

To wait them with his keys, and now at foot 

Of Heaven's ascent they lift their feet, when, lo ! 

A violent cross wind from either coast 

Blows them transverse, ten thousand leagues awry, 

Into the devious air. Then might ye see 

Cowls, hoods, and habits, with their wearers, tost 490 

And fluttered into rags; then reliques, beads, 

Indulgences, dispenses, pardons, bulls, 

The sport of winds : all these, upwhirled aloft, 

Fly o'er the backside of the World far off 

Into a limbo large and broad, since called 

The Paradise of Fools; to few unknown 

Long after, now unpeopled and untrod. 

All this dark globe the Fiend found as he passed; 
 And long he wandered, till at last a gleam 
Of dawning light turned thitherward in haste 500 

fHis travelled steps. Far distant he descries, 
Ascending by degrees magnificent 
Up to the wall of Heaven, a structure high; 
At top whereof, but far more rich, appeared 
The work as of a kingly palace-gate, 
With frontispiece of diamond and gold 
Embellished; thick with sparkling orient gems 
The portal shone, inimitable on Earth 
By model, or by shading pencil drawn. 
The stairs were such as whereon Jacob saw 510 

Angels ascending and descending, bands 
Of guardians bright, when he from Esau fled 
To Padan-Aram, in the field of Luz 
Dreaming by night under the open sky, 
And waking cried, "This is the gate of Heaven." 
Each stair mysteriously was meant, nor stood 
There always, but drawn up to Heaven sometimes 



BOOK III. 89 

Viewless ; and underneath a bright sea flowed 

Of jasper, or of liquid pearl, whereon 

Who after came from Earth sailing arrived, 520 

Wafted by Angels, or flew o'er the lake, 

Rapt in a chariot drawn by fiery steeds. 

The stairs were then let down, whether to dare 

The Fiend by easy ascent, or aggravate 

His sad exclusion from the doors of bliss ; 

Direct against which opened from beneath, 

Just o'er the blissful seat of Paradise, 

A passage down to the Earth, a passage wide; 

Wider by far than that of after-times 

Over Mount Sion, and, though that were large, 530 

Over the Promised Land to God so dear; 

By which, to visit oft those happy tribes, 

On high behests his Angels to and fro 

Passed frequent, and his eye with choice regard, 

From Paneas, the fount of Jordan's flood, 

To Begisaha* where the Holy Land 

Borders on Egypt and. the Arabian shore. 

So wide the opening seemed, where bounds were set 

To darkness, such as bound the ocean wave. 

Satan from hence, now on the lower stair, 540 

That scaled by steps of gold to Heaven-gate, 
Ldoks"Hown with wonder at the sudden view 
Of all this World at once. As when a scout, 
Through dark and desert ways with peril gone 
All night, at last by break of cheerful dawn 
Obtains the brow of some high-climbing hill, 
Which to his eye discovers unaware 
|The goodly prospect of some foreign land 
tirst seen, or some renowned metropolis 
jVith glistering spires and pinnacles adorned, 550 



9O PARADISE LOST. 

Which now the rising sun gilds with his beams : 

Such wonder seized, though after Heaven seen, 

The Spirit malign, but much more envy seized, 

At sight of all this World beheld so fair. 

Round he surveys (and well might where he stood, 

So high above the circling canopy 

Of Night's extended shade) from eastern point 

Of Libra to the fleecy star that bears 

Andromeda far off Atlantic seas 

Beyond the horizon; then from pole to pole 560 

He views in breadth; and, without longer pause, 

Down right into the World's first region throws 

His flight precipitant, and winds with ease 

Through the pure marble air his oblique way 

Amongst innumerable stars, that shone 

Stars distant, but nigh-hand seemed other worlds. 

Or other worlds they seemed, or happy isles, 

Like those Hesperian Gardens famed of old, 

Fortunate fields, and groves, and flowery vales, 

Thrice happy isles; but who dwelt happy there 570 

He stayed not to inquire. Above them all 

The golden sun, in splendour likest Heaven, 

Allured his eye. Thither his course he bends, 

Through the calm firmament (but up or down, 

By centre or eccentric, hard to tell, 

Or longitude) where the great luminary, 

Aloof the vulgar constellations thick, 

That from his lordly eye keep distance due, 

Dispenses light from far. They, as they move 

Their starry dance in numbers that compute 580 

Days, months, and years, towards his all-cheering lamp 

Turn swift their various motions, or are turned 

By his magnetic beam, that gently warms 



BOOK III. 91 

The Universe, and to each inward part 
With gentle penetration, though unseen, 
Shoots invisible virtue even to the deep; 
So wondrously was set his station bright. 

There lands the Fiend, a spot like which perhaps 
Astronomer in the sun's lucent orb 

Through his glazed optic tube yet never saw. 590 

The place he found beyond expression bright, 
Compared with aught on Earth, metal or stone; 
' Not all parts like, but all alike informed 
1 With radiant light, as glowing iron with fire : 
1 If metal, part seemed gold, part silver clear ; 
If stone, carbuncle most or chrysolite, 
Ruby or topaz, to tjffi J-WAW ti<- chnn^ 
In Aaron's breast-plate, and a stone besides, 
Imagined rather oft than elsewhere seen 
That stone, or like to that, which here below 600 

Philosophers in vain so long have sought; 
In vain, though by their powerful art they bind 
Volatile Hermes, and call up unbound 
In various shapes old Proteus from the sea, 
Drained through a limbec to his native form. 
What wonder then if fields and regions here 
Breathe forth elixir pure, and rivers run 
Potable gold, when, with one virtuous touch, 
The arch-chemic sun, so far from us remote, 
Produces, with terrestrial humour mixed, 610 

Here in the dark so many precious things 
Of colour glorious and effect so rare? 
Here matter new to gaze the Devil met 
Undazzled. Far and wide his eye commands; 
For sight no obstacle found here, nor shade, 
But all sunshine, as when his beams at noon 



92 PARADISE LOST. 

Culminate from the equator, as they now 

Shot upward still direct, whence no way round 

Shadow from body opaque can fall ; and the air, 

Nowhere so clear, sharpened his visual ray 620 

To objects distant far, whereby he soon 

Saw within ken a glorious Angel stand, 

The same whom John saw also in the sun. 

His back was turned, but not his brightness hid; 

Of beaming sunny rays a golden tiar 

Circled his head, nor less his locks behind 

Illustrious on his shoulders fledge with wings 

Lay waving round : on some great charge employed 

He seemed, or fixed in cogitation deep. 

Glad was the Spirit impure, as now in hope 630 

I To find who might direct his wandering flight 

 To Paradise, the happy seat of Man, 

His journey's end, and our beginning woe. 

'jBut first he casts to change his proper shape, 

^Vhich else might work him danger or delay: 

And now a stripling Cherub he appears, 

Not of the prime, yet such as in his face 

Youth smiled celestial, and to every limb 

Suitable grace diffused; so well he feigned. 

Under a coronet his flowing hair 640 

In curls on either cheek played; wings he wore 

Of many a coloured plume sprinkled with gold, 

His habit fit for speed succinct; and held 

Before his decent steps a silver wand. 

He drew not nigh unheard; the Angel bright, 

Ere he drew nigh, his radiant visage turned, 

Admonished by his ear, and straight was known 

The Archangel Uriel; one of the seven 

Who in God's presence, nearest to his throne, 



BOOK III. 93 

Stand ready at command, and are his eyes 650 

That run through all the Heavens, or down to the Earth 
Bear his swift errands over moist and dry, 
O'er sea and land. Him Satan thus accosts : 

" Uriel ! for thou of those seven Spirits that stand 
In sight of God's high throne, gloriously bright, 
The first art wont his great authentic will 
Interpreter through highest Heaverf to bring, 
Where all his Sons thy embassy attend ; 
And here art likeliest by supreme decree 
Like honour to obtain, and as his eye 660 

To visit oft this new creation round ; 
Unspeakable desire to see and know 
All these his wondrous works, but chiefly Man, 
His chief delight and favour, him for whom 
All these his works so wondrous he ordained, 
Hath brought me from the quires of Cherubim 
Alone thus wandering. Brightest Seraph, tell 
In which of all these shining orbs hath Man 
His fixed seat; or fixed seat hath none, 
But all these shining orbs his choice to dwell; 670 

That I may find him, and with secret gaze 
Or open admiration him behold 
On whom the great Creator hath bestowed 
Worlds, and on whom hath all these graces poured; 
That both in him and all things, as is meet, 
The Universal Maker we may praise; 
Who justly hath driven out his rebel foes 
To deepest Hell, and, to repair that loss, 
Created this new happy race of Men 
To serve him better: wise are all his ways!" 680 

So spake the false dissembler unperceived; 
For neither man nor Angel can discern 



94 PARADISE LOST. 

Hypocrisy, the only evil that walks 

Invisible, except to God alone, 

By his permissive will, through Heaven and Earth; 

And oft, though Wisdom wake, Suspicion sleeps 

At Wisdom's gate, and to Simplicity 

Resigns her charge, while Goodness thinks no ill 

Where no ill seems : which now for once beguiled 

Uriel, though regent of the sun, and held 690 

The sharpest-sighted Spirit of all in Heaven; 

Who to the fraudulent impostor foul, 

In his uprightness, answer thus returned: 

"Fair Angel, thy desire, which tends to know 
The works of God, thereby to glorify 
The great Work-master, leads to no excess 
That reaches blame, but rather merits praise 
The more it seems excess, that led thee hither 
From thy empyreal mansion thus alone, 
To witness with thine eyes what some perhaps, 700 

Con tented with report, hear only in Heaven; 
For wonderful indeed are all his works, 
Pleasant to know, and worthiest to be all 
Had in remembrance always with delight! 
But what created mind can comprehend 
Their number, or the wisdom infinite 
That brought them forth, but hid their causes deep? 
I saw when at his word the formless mass, 
This World's material mould, came to a heap: 
Confusion heard his voice, and wild uproar 710 

Stood ruled, stood vast infinitude confined; 
Till at his second bidding Darkness fled, 
Light shone, and order from disorder sprung. 
Swift to their several quarters hasted then 
The cumbrous elements earth, flood, air, fire; 



BOOK III. 95 

And this ethereal quintessence of Heaven 

Flew upward, spirited with various forms, 

That rolled orbicular, and turned to stars 

Numberless, as thou seest, and how they move; 

Each had his place appointed, each his course; 720 

The rest in circuit walls this Universe. 

Look downward on that globe, whose hither side 

With light from hence, though but reflected, shines : 

That place is Earth, the seat of Man; that light 

His day, which else, as the other hemisphere, 

Night would invade; but there the neighbouring moon 

(So call that opposite fair star) her aid 

Timely interposes, and, her monthly round 

Still ending, still renewing, through mid Heaven, 

With borrowed light her countenance triform 730 

Hence fills and empties, to enlighten the Earth, 

And in her pale dominion checks the night. 

That spot to which I point is Paradise, 

Adam's abode; those lofty shades his bower. 

Thy way thou canst not miss; me mine requires." 

Thus said, he turned; and Satan, bowing low, 
As to superior Spirits is wont in Heaven, 
Where honour due and reverence none neglects, 
Took leave, and toward the coast of Earth beneath, 
Down from the ecliptic, sped with hoped success, 740 
Throws his steep flight in many an aery wheel, 
Nor stayed till on Niphates' top he lights. 



BOOK IV. 



P. L. 



THE ARGUMENT. 



Satan, now in prospect of Eden, and nigh the place where he must 
now attempt the bold enterprise which he undertook alone against God 
and Man, falls into many doubts with himself, and many passions 
fear, envy, and despair; but at length Confirms himself in evil ; journeys 
on to Paradise, whose outward prospect and situation is described; 
overleaps the bounds; sits, in the shape of a cormorant, on the Tree 
of Life, as highest in the Garden, to look about him. The Garden 
described: Satan's first sight of Adam and Eve; his wonder at their 
pvrfllpnt form and happy state, but with resolutiflnj^ work their fall; 
overhears their discourse ; thence gathers that the Tree of Knowledge 
was forbidden them to eat of under penalty of death, and thereon 
intends to found his temptation &y seducing thenTTcTtransgress ; then 
leaves them a while, to know further of their state by some other 
means. Meanwhile Uriel, descending on a sunbeam, warns Gabriel, 
who had in charge the gate of Paradise, that some evil Spirit had 
escaped the Deep, and passed at noon by his Sphere, in the shape of a 
good Angel, down to Paradise ; discovered after by his furious gestures 
in the mount. Gabriel promises to find him ere morning. Night 
coming on, Adam and Eve discourse of going to their rest : their bower 
described; their evening worship. Gabriel, drawing forth his bands of 
night-watch to walk the rounds of Paradise, appoints two strong Angels 
to Adam's bower, lest the evil Spirit should be there doing some harm 
to Adam or Eve sleeping : there they find him at the ear- of Eve, 
tempting her in a dream, and bring him, though unwilling, to Gabriel; 
by whom questioned, he scornfully answers, prepares resistance, but, 
hindered by a sign from Heaven, flies out of Paradise. 



BOOK IV. 



OFOR that warning voice, which he who saw 
The Apocalypse heard cry in Heaven aloud, 
Then when the Dragon, put to second rout, 
Came furious down to be revenged on men, 
"Woe to the inhabitants on Earth!" that now, 
While time was, our first parents had been warned 
The coming of their secret foe, and scaped, 
Haply so scaped, his mortal snare ! For now 
Satan, now first inflamed with rage, came down, 
The tempter ere the accuser of mankind, 10 

To wreak on innocent frail Man his loss 
Of that first battle, and his flight to Hell : 
Yet not rejoicing in his speed, though bold 
Far off and fearless, nor with cause to boast, 
Begins his dire attempt; which, nigh the birth 
Now rolling, boils in his tumultuous breast, 
And like a devilish engine back recoils 
Upon himself. Horror and doubt distract 
His troubled thoughts, and from" the bottom stir 
The hell within him; for within him Hell 20 

He brings, and round about him, nor from Hell 
One step, no more than from himself, can fly 

72 






i re #wy 

IOO PARADISE LOST. 

By change of place. Now conscience_ wakes despair 
That slumbered; wakes the bitter memory 
Of what he was, what is, and what must be 
Worse : of worse deeds worse sufferings must ensue ! 
Sometimes towards Eden, which now in his view 
Lay pleasant, his grieved look he fixes sad; 
Sometimes towards Heaven and the full-blazing sun, 
Which now sat high in his meridian tower : 30 

Then, much revolving, thus in sighs began : 

"O thou that, with surpassing glory crowned, 
Look'st from thy sole dominion like the god 
Of this new World ; at whose sight all the stars 
Hide their diminished heads; ,to thee I call, 

 But with no friendly voice, ^aj^i add thy name, 
sZ-^ O Sun, to tell thee how I {hate) thy beams^ 

That bring to my remembrance from what state 

j I fell, how glorious once above thy sphere, c% 
Till pride and worse ambition threw me down, 40 

Warringjn Heaven against Heaven'sjnatchless King ! 
Ah, wherefore ? He~deserved no such return 

 From me, whom he created what I was 
In that bright eminence, and with his good 
Upbraided none; nor was his service hard. 
What could be less than to afford him praise, 

!  The easiest recompense, and pay him thanks, 

; How due ? Yet all his good proved ill in me, 
And wrought but malice. ^Lifted up so high, 
I sdeined subjection, and thought one step higher 50 
Would set me highest, and in a moment quit 
The debt immense of endless gratitude, 
So burdensome, still paying, still to owe; 
Forgetful what from him I still received; 
And understood not that a grateful mind 




BOOK IV. 101 

By owing owes not, but still pays, at once 

Indebted and discharged what burden then? 

Oh, had his powerful destiny ordained 

Me some inferior Angel, I had stood 

Then happy; no unbounded hope had raised 60 

Ambition. Yet why not? some other power 

As great might have aspired, and me, though mean, 

Drawn to his part. But other powers as great 

Fell not, but stand unshaken, from within 

Or from without, to all temptations armed. 

Ha^isJ_JhojyLlke_^ stand ? 

Thou hadst. Whom hast thou then, or what, to accuse, 

But Heaven's freej lovejdealt equajly^jo all?__ 

Be then his love accursed, since, love or hate, 

To me alike it deals eternal woe. 70 

Nay, cursed be thou; since against his thy will 

Chose freely what it now so justly rues. 

Me miserable ! which way shall I fly 

Infinite wrath ajid infinite despair? 

Whichway I^7^s~lTelTpmyW-am Hell; ^ 

And, in the lowest deep, a lower deep 

Still threatening to devour me opens wide, - 

To which the Hell I suffer seems a Heaven. 

O, then, at last relent ! Is there no place 

Left for repentance, none for pardon left? - i 80 

None left but by submission; and that word 

Disdain forbids me, and my dread of shame 

Among the Spirits beneath, whom I seduced 

With other promises and other vaunts 

Than to submit, boasting I could subdue 

The Omnipotent. Ay me ! they little know 

How dearly I abide that boast so vain, 

Under what torments inwardly I groan. 




102 PARADISE LOST. 

While they adore me on the throne of Hell, 

With diadem and sceptre high advanced, 90 

The^ lower stilLJ-feiy only supreme 

In^misery : such joy ambition "finds ! 

But say I could repent, and could obtain 

By act of grace my former state ; how soon 

Would highth recal high thoughts, how soon unsay 

What feigned, submission swore ! Ease would recant 

Vows made in pain, as violent and void 

IFor never can true reconcilement grow 
Where wounds of deadly hate have pierced so deep 

Which would but lead me to a worse relapse 100 

And heavier fall : so should I purchase dear 
j Short intermission, bought with double smart. 
I This knows my Punisher; therefore as far 
| From granting he, as I from begging, peace. 

All hope excludedr-thusr -behold, instead 

Of us, outcast, exiled, his new delight, 

Mankind created, and for himthis World! 

So farewell hope, and with hope farewell fear, 

FarJwenjimoTse j All good to me is lost ; 

Evil L be thou my goodT by thee at least no 

Divided ^empire with^Hgaveifs King I hold, 

By thee, and more than half perhaps will reign ; 
I As Man ere long and this new World shall know." * 
Thus while he spake, each passion dimmed his face, 

Thrice changed with pale ire, envy, and despair; 

Which marred his borrowed visage, and betrayed 

Him counterfeit, if any eye beheld; 

For Heavenly minds from such distempers foul 

Are ever clear. Whereof he soon aware 

Each perturbation smoothed with outward calm, 120 

Artificer of fraud; and was the first 



HOOK IV. IO3 

That practised falsehood under saintly show, 

Deep malice to conceal, couched with revenge: 

Yet not enough had practised to deceive 

Uriel, once warned; whose eye pursued him down 

The way he went, and on the Assyrian mount 

SaAaLMnX-disfigured, rnj^rje..than^cmiTcT^r5eTair " 

Spirit of happy sort: his gestures fierce 

Hejnarked and. mad demeanour, then, alone, 

As he supposed, all unobserved, unseen. 130 

So on he fares, and to the border comes 
Of Eden, where delicious Paradise, * 

Now nearer, crowns with her enclosure green, 
As with a rural mound, the champain head 
Of a steep wilderness, whose hairy sides 
With thicket overgrown, grotesque and wild, 
Access denied; and overhead up-grew 
Insuperable highth of loftiest shade, 
Cedar, and pine, and fir, and branching palm, 
A sylvan scene, and, as the ranks ascend 140 

Shade above shade, a woody theatre 
Of stateliest view. Yet higher than their tops 
The verdurous wall of Paradise up-sprung; 
Which to our general sire gave prospect large 
Into his nether empire neighbouring round. 
And higher than that wall a circling row 
Of goodliest trees, loaden with fairest fruit, 
Blossoms and fruits at once of golden hue, 
Appeared, with gay enamelled colours mixed ; 
On which the sun more glad impressed his beams 150 
Than in fair evening cloud, or humid bow, 
When God hath showered the earth : so lovely seemed 
That landskip. And of pure now purer air 
Meets his approach, and to the heart inspires 



104 PARADISE LOST. 

Vernal delight and joy, able to drive 
All sadness but despair; now gentle gales, 
Fanning their odoriferous wings, dispense 
Native perfumes, and whisper whence they stole 
Those balmy spoils. As when to them who sail 
Beyond the Cape of Hope, and now are past 160 

Mozarnbic, off at sea north-east winds blow 
SibaearTodours from the spicy shore 
Of 4raby the Blest: with such delay 
Well pleased they slack their course, and many a league 
Cheered with the grateful smell old Ocean smiles: 
So entertained those odorous sweets the Fiend 
Who came their bane, though with them better pleased 
Than Asmode'us with the fishy fume 
That drove^Kim, though enamoured, from the spouse 
Of Tobias, son, and with a vengeance sent 170 

From Media post to Egypt, there fast bound. 
Now to the ascent of that steep savage hill 
Satan had journeyed on, pensive and slow; 
But further way found none; so thick entwined, 
As one continued brake, the undergrowth 
Of shrubs and tangling bushes had perplexed 
All path of man or beast that passed that way. 
One gate there only was, and that looked east 
On the other side : which when the Arch-Felon saw, 
Due entrance he disdained, and in contempt 180 

At one slight bound high overleaped all bound 
Of hill or highest wall, and sheer within 
.Lights on his feet. As when a prowling wolf, 
I Whom hunger drives to seek new haunt for prey, 
i Watching where shepherds pen their flocks at eve, 
jln hurdled cotes amid the field secure, 
^Leaps o'er the fence with ease into the fold; 



BOOK IV. 105 

lOr as a thief, bent to unhoard the cash 
Of some rich burgher, whose substantial doors, 
Cross-barred and bolted fast, fear no assault, 190 

In at the window climbs, or o'er the tiles : 
So clomb this first grand thief into God's fold : 
So since into his Church lewd hirelings climb. 
Thence up he flew, and on the Tree of Life, 
The middle tree and highest there that grew, 
Sat like a cormorant; yet not true life 
Thereby regained, but sat devising death 
To them who lived ; nor on the virtue thought 
Of that life-giving plant, but only used 
For prospect what, well used, had been the pledge 200 
Of immortality. So little knows 
Any but God alone to value right 
The good before him, but perverts best things 
To worst abuse, or to their meanest use. 

Beneath him, with new wonder, now he views, 
To all delight of human sense exposed, 
In narrow room Nature's whole wealth; yea, more 
A Heaven on Earth; for blissful Paradise ** 
Of God the garden was, by him in the east 
Of Eden planted : Eden stretched her line 210 

From Auran eastward to the royal towers 
Of great Seleucia, built by Grecian kings, 
Or wfiere^the sons of Eden long before 
Dwelt in Telassar. In this pleasant soil 
His far more pleasant garden God ordained. 
Out of the fertile ground he caused to grow 
AH trees of noblest kind for sight, smell, taste; 
And all amid them stood the Tree of Life, 
High eminent, blooming ambrosial fruit 
Of vegetable gold; and next to life, 220 



106 PARADISE LOST. 

Our death, the Tree of Knowledge, grew fast by 
Knowledge of good bought dear by knowing ill. 
Southward through Eden went a river large, 
Nor changed his course, but through the shaggy hill 
Passed underneath ingulfed; for God had thrown 
That mountain as his garden-mould, high raised 
Upon the rapid current, which, through veins 
Of porous earth with kindly thirst up-drawn, 
Rose a fresh fountain, and with many a rill 
Watered the garden ; thence united fell 230 

Down the steep glade, and met the nether flood, 
Which from his darksome passage now appears; 
And now, divided into four main streams, 
Runs diverse, wandering many a famous realm 
And country, whereof here needs no account; 
But rather to tell how, if art could tell, 
How from that sapphire fount the crisped brooks, 
Rolling on orient pearl and sands of gold, 
With mazy error under pendent shades 
Ran nectar, visiting each plant, and fed 240 

Flowers worthy of Paradise; which not nice art 
In beds and curious knots, but Nature boon 
Poured forth profuse on hill, and dale, and plain, 
Both where the morning sun first warmly smote 
vl The open field, and where the unpierced shade ^ 
Imbrowned the noontide bowersj) Thus was this place, 
A happy rural seat of various view : 
Groves whose rich trees wept odorous gums and balm; 
Others whose fruit, burnished with golden rind, 
Hung amiable Hesperian fables true, 250 

If true, here only and of delicious taste. 
Betwixt them lawns, or level downs, and flocks 
Grazing the tender herb, were interposed, 






BOOK IV. 

Or palmy hillock; or the flowery lap 

Of some irriguous valley spread her store, 

Flowers of all hue, and without thorn the rose. 

Another side, umbrageous grots and caves 

Of cool recess, o'er which the mantling vine 

Lays forth her purple grape, and gently creeps 

Luxuriant; meanwhile murmuring waters fall 260 

Down the slope hills dispersed, or in a lake, 

That to the fringed bank with myrtle crowned 

Her crystal mirror holds, unite their streams. 

The birds their quire apply ; airs, vernal airs, 

Breathing the smell of field and grove, attune 

The trembling leaves, while universal Pan, 

Knit with the Graces and the Hours in dance, 

Led on the eternal Spring. Not that fair field 

Of Enna, where Proserpin gathering flowers, 

Herself a fairer flower, by gloomy Dis 

Was gathered which cost Ceres all that pain 

To seek her through the world, nor that sweet grove 

Of Daphne by Orontes, and the inspired 

Castalian spring, might with this Paradise 

Of Eden strive; nor that Nyseian isle, 

Girt with the river Triton, where old Cham, 

Whom Gentiles Ammon call and Libyan Jove, 

Hid Amalthea, and her florid son, 

Young Bacchus, from his stepdame Rhea's eye; 

Nor where Abassin kings their issue guard, 280 

Mount Amara, though this by some supposed 

True Paradise, under the Ethiop line 

By Nilus' head, enclosed with shining rock, 

A whole day's journey high, but wide remote 

From this Assyrian garden, where the Fiend 

Saw undelighted all delight, all kind 



108 PARADISE LOST. 

Of living creatures, new to sight and strange. 

Two of far nobler shape, erect and tall, 
God-like erect, with native honour clad, 
In naked majesty seemed lords of all, 290 

And worthy seemed ; for in their looks divine 
The image of their glorious Maker shone, 
Truth, wisdom, sanctitude severe and pure 
Severe, but in true filial freedom placed, 
Whence true authority in men; though both 
i Not equal, as their sex not equal seemed : 
For contemplation he and valour formed, 
For softness she and sweet attractive grace; 

for God only, she for God in him. ^ 
His fair large front and eye sublime declared 300 

Absolute rule; and hyacinthine locks 
Round from his parted forelock manly hung 
Clustering, but not beneath his shoulders broad: 
She, as a veil down to the slender waist, 
Her unadorned golden tresses wore 
Dishevelled, but in wanton ringlets waved, 
As the vine curls her tendrils vhich implied 
Subjection, but required with gentle sway, 
And by her yielded, by him best received, 
Yielded with coy submission, modest pride, . 310 

And sweet, reluctant, amorous delay. 
Nor those mysterious parts were then concealed; 
Then was not guilty shame. Dishonest shame 
Of Nature's works, honour dishonourable, 
Sin-bred, how have ye troubled all mankind 
With shows instead, mere shows of seeming pure, 
And banished from man's life his happiest life, 
Simplicity and spotless innocence ! 
So passed they naked on, nor shunned the sight 



BOOK IV. 109 

Of God or Angel, for they thought no ill; 320 

So hand in hand they passed, the loveliest pair 

That ever since in love's embraces met : 

Adam the goodliest man of men since born 

His sons, the fairest of her daughters Eve. 

Under a tuft of shade that on a green 

Stood whispering soft, by a fresh fountain-side, 

They sat them down ; and after no more toil 

Of their sweet gardening labour than sufficed 

To recommend cool Zephyr, and make ease 

More easy, wholesome thirst and appetite 330 

More grateful, to their supper-fruits they fell, 

Nectarine fruits, which the compliant boughs 

Yielded them, sidelong as they sat recline 

On the soft downy bank damasked with flowers. 

The savoury pulp they chew, and in the rind, 

Still as they thirsted, scoop the brimming stream; 

Nor gentle purpose, nor endearing smiles 

Wanted, nor youthful dalliance, as beseems 

Fair couple linked in .happy nuptial league, 

Alone as they. About them frisking played 340 

All beasts of the earth, since wild, and of all chase 

In wood or wilderness, forest or den. 

Sporting the lion ramped, and in his paw 

Dandled the kid; bears, tigers, ounces, pards, 

Gambolled before them; the unwieldy elephant, 

To make them mirth, used all his might, and wreathed 

His lithe proboscis ; close the serpent sly, 

Insinuating, wove with Gordian twine 

His braided train, and of his fatal guile 

Gave proof unheeded. Others on the grass 350 

Couched, and now filled with pasture gazing sat, 

Or bed ward ruminating; for the sun, 



HO PARADISE LOST. 

Declined, was hastening now with prone career 
To the Ocean Isles, and in the ascending scale 
Of Heaven the stars that usher evening rose: 
When Satan, still in gaze as first he stood, 
Scarce thus at length failed speech recovered sad : 

" O Hell ! what do mine eyes with grief behold ? 
Into our room of bliss thus high advanced 
Creatures of other mould, Earth-born perhaps, 360 

Not Spirits, yet to Heavenly Spirits bright 
Little inferior; whom my thoughts pursue 
With wonder, and could love, so lively shines 
In them divine resemblance, and such grace 
The hand that formed them on their shape hath poured. 
Ah  gentle pair, ye little think how nigh 
Your change approaches, when all these delights 
Will vanish, and deliver ye to woe 
More woe, the more your taste is now of joy : 
Happy, but for so happy ill secured 370 

Long to continue, and this high seat, your Heaven, 
111 fenced for Heaven to keep out such a foe 
As now is entered; yet no purposed foe 
To you, whom I could pity thus forlorn, 
Though I unpitied. League with you I seek, 
And mutual amity, so strait, so close, 
That I with you must dwell, or you with me, 
Henceforth: my dwelling, haply, may not please, 
Like this fair Paradise, your sense ; yet such 
Accept your Maker's work; he gave it me, 380 

Which I as freely give. Hell shall unfold, 
To entertain you two, her widest gates, 
And send forth all her kings; there will be room, 
Not like these narrow limits, to receive 
Your numerous offspring; if no better place, 



BOOK IV. Ill 

Thank him who puts me loath to this revenge 

On you who wrong me not, for him who wronged. 

And, should I at your harmless innocence 

Melt, as I do, yet public reason just 

Honour and empire with revenge enlarged 390 

By conquering this new World compels me now 

To do what else, though damned, I should abhor." 

So spake the Fiend, and with necessity, 
The tyrant's plea, excused his devilish deeds. 
Then from his lofty stand on that high tree 
Down he alights among the sportful herd 
Of those four-footed kinds, himself now one, 
Now other, as their shape served best his end 
Nearer to view his prey, and unespied 
To mark what of their state he more might learn 400 
By word or action marked. About them round 
A lion now he stalks with fiery glare; 
Then as a tiger, who by chance hath spied 
In some purlieu two gentle fawns at play, 
Straight couches . close ; then, rising, changes oft 
His couchant watch, as one who chose his ground, 
Whence rushing he might surest seize them both, 
Griped in each paw : when Adam, first of men, 
To first of women, Eve, thus moving speech, 
Turned him all ear to hear new utterance flow: 410 

"Sole partner and sole part of all these joys, 
^Dearer thyself than all, needs must the Power 
That made us, and for us this ample World, 
Be infinitely good, and of his good 
As liberal and free as infinite; 
' That raised us from the dust, and placed us here 
^n all this happiness, who at his hand 
Have nothing merited, nor can perform 



112 PARADISE LOST. 

Aught whereof he hath need; he who requires 

From us no other service than to keep 420 

This one, this easy charge of all the trees 

In Paradise that bear delicious fruit 

So various, not to taste that only Tree 

Of Knowledge, planted by the Tree of Life; 

So near grows death to life, whate'er death is ; 
^ Some dreadful thing no doubt; for well thou know'st 

God hath pronounced it death to taste that Tree 

The only sign of our obedience left 

Among so many signs of power and rule 

Conferred upon us, and dominion given 430 

Over all other creatures that possess 

Earth, air, and sea. Then let us not think hard 

One easy prohibition, who enjoy 

Free leave so large to all things else, and choice 

Unlimited of manifold delights; 

But let us ever praise him, and extol 

His bounty, following our delightful task, 

To prune these growing plants, and tend these flowers ; 

Which, were it toilsome, yet with thee were sweet." 
f To whom thus Eve replied: "O thou for whom 440 

And from whom I was formed, flesh of thy flesh, 

And without whom am to no end, my guide 

And head ! what thou hast said is just and right. 

For we to him indeed all praises owe, 

And daily thanks; I chiefly, who enjoy 

So far the happier lot, enjoying thee 

Pre-eminent by so much odds, while thou 

Like consort to thyself canst nowhere find. 

That day I oft remember, when from sleep 

I first awaked, and found myself reposed 450 

Under a shade on flowers, much wondering where 



BOOK IV. 113 

And what I was, whence thither brought, and how. 
Not distant far from thence a murmuring sound 
Of waters issued from a cave, and spread 
Into a liquid plain ; then stood unmoved, 
Pure as the expanse of Heaven. I thither went 
With unexperienced thought, and laid me down 
On the green bank, to look into the clear 
r Smooth lake, that to me seemed another sky. 
, As I bent down to look, just opposite 460 

A shape within the watery gleam appeared, 
Bending to look on me : I started back, 
It started back; but pleased I soon returned, 
Pleased it returned as soon with answering looks 
Of sympathy and love. There I had fixed 
Mine eyes till now, and pined with vain desire, 
Had not a voice thus warned me : ' What thou seest, 
What there thou seest, fair creature, is thyself; 
With thee it came and goes : but follow me, 
And I will bring thee where no shadow stays 470 

Thy coming, and thy soft embraces he 
Whose image thou art; him thou shalt enjoy 
Inseparably thine; to him shalt bear 
Multitudes like thyself, and thence be called 
Mother of human race.' What could I do 
But follow straight, invisibly thus led? 
Till I espied thee, fair indeed and tall, 
Under a platane; yet methought less fair, 
Less winning soft, less amiably mild, 
Than that smooth watery image. Back I turned; 480 
Thou, following, cried'st aloud, 'Return, fair Eve; 
Whom fliest thou? whom thou fliest, of him thou art, 
His flesh, his bone; to give thee being I lent 
Out of my side to thee, nearest my heart, 

p. L. 8 



114 PARADISE LOST. 

Substantial life, to have thee by my side 

Henceforth an individual solace dear : 

Part of my soul, I seek thee, and thee claim 

My other half.' With that thy gentle hand 

Seized mine: I yielded; and from that time see 

How beauty is excelled by manly grace 490 

And wisdom, which alone is truly fair." 

So spake our general mother, and with eyes 
Of conjugal attraction unreproved, 
And meek surrender, half-embracing leaned 
On our first father; half her swelling breast 
Naked met his, under the flowing gold 
Of her loose tresses hid. He, in delight 
Both of her beauty and submissive charms, 

miled with superior love, as Jupiter 
On Juno smiles when he impregns the clouds 500 

That shed May flowers, and pressed her matron lip 

ith kisses pure. Aside the Devil turned 
For envy; yet with jealous leer malign 
Eyed them askance, and to himself thirs plained : 
, " Sight hateful, sight tormenting ! thus these two, 
Imparadised in one another's arms, 
The happier Eden, shall enjoy their fill 
iDf bliss on bliss ; while I to Hell am thrust, 
Where neither joy nor love, but fierce desire, 
Among our other torments not the least, 510 

Still unfulfilled, with pain of longing pines. 
Yet let me not forget what I have gained 
From their own mouths. All is not theirs, it seems; 
One fatal tree there stands, of Knowledge called, 
Forbidden them to taste. Knowledge forbidden? 
Suspicious, reasonless ! why should their Lord 
Envy them that? can it be sin to know? 



BOOK IV. 115 

Can it be death? and do they only stand 
By ignorance? is that their happy state, 
The proof of their obedience and their faith? 520 

O fair foundation laid whereon to build 
Their ruin ! Hence I will excite their minds 
With more desire to know, and to reject 
Envious commands, invented with design 
To keep them low, whom knowledge might exalt 
Equal with gods. Aspiring to be such, 
Xhey taste and fle i what like.lip.r. can ensue? :&-ei^H 
But first with narrow search I must walk round 
This garden, and no corner leave unspied; 
A chance but chance may lead where I may meet 530 
Some wandering Spirit of Heaven, by fountain-side, 
Or in thick shade retired, from him to draw 
What further would be learned. Live while ye may, 
Yet happy pair; enjoy, till I return, 
Short pleasures; for long woes are to succeed." 
So saying, his proud step he scornful turned, 
But with sly circumspection, and began 
Through wood, through waste, o'er hill, o'er dale, his roam. 
Meanwhile in utmost longitude, where Heaven 
With Earth and Ocean meets, the setting sun 540 

Slowly descended, and with right aspect 
Against the eastern gate of Paradise 
Levelled his evening rays. It was a rock 
Of alabaster, piled up to the clouds, 
Conspicuous far, winding with one ascent 
Accessible from Earth, one entrance high; 
The rest was craggy cliff, that overhung 
Still as it rose, impossible to climb. 
Betwixt these rocky pillars Gabriel sat, 
Chief of the angelic guards, awaiting night; 550 

82 



Il6 PARADISE LOST. 

About him exercised heroic games 

The unarmed youth of Heaven ; but nigh at hand 

Celestial armoury, shields, helms, and spears, 

Hung high, with diamond flaming and with gold. 

Thither came Uriel, gliding through the even 

On a sunbeam, swift as a shooting star 

In autumn thwarts the night, when vapours fired 

Impress the air, and shows the mariner 

From what point of his compass to beware 

Impetuous winds. He thus began in haste: 560 

"Gabriel, to thee thy course by lot hath given 
Charge and strict watch, that to this happy place 
No evil thing approach or enter in. 
This day at highth of noon came to my sphere 
A Spirit, zealous, as he seemed, to know 
More of the Almighty's works, and chiefly Man, 
God's latest image. I described his way 
Bent all on speed, and marked his aery gait; 
, But in the mount that lies from Eden north, 
Where he first lighted, soon discerned his looks 570 

Alien from Heaven, with passions foul obscured. 
,Mine eye pursued him still, but under shade 
Lost sight of him. One of the banished crew, 
I fear, hath ventured from the Deep, to raise 
New troubles; him thy care must be to find." 
To whom the winged warrior thus returned: 
" Uriel, no wonder if thy perfect sight, 
Amid the Sun's bright circle where thou sitt'st, 
See far and wide. In at this gate none pass 
The vigilance here placed, but such as come 580 

Well-known from Heaven; and since meridian hour 
No creature thence. If Spirit of other sort, 
So minded, have o'erleaped these earthy bounds 



BOOK IV. 117 

On purpose, hard thou know'st it to exclude 

Spiritual substance with corporeal bar. 

But if within the circuit of these walks, 

In whatsoever shape, he lurk of whom 

Thou tell'st, by morrow dawning I shall know." 

So promised he; and Uriel to his charge 
Returned on that bright beam, whose point now raised 590 
Bore him slope downward to the sun, now fallen 
Beneath the Azores ; whether the prime orb, 
Incredible how swift, had thither rolled 
Diurnal, or this less volubil Earth, 
By shorter flight to the east, had left him there, 
Arraying with reflected purple and gold 
The clouds that on his western throne attend. 

Now came still Evening on, and Twilight gray 
Had in her sober livery all things clad ; 
Silence accompanied; for beast and bird, 600 

They to their grassy couch, these to their nests, 
Were slunk, all but the wakeful nightingale; 
She all night long her amorous descant sung : 
Silence was pleased. Now glowed the firmament 
With living sapphires; Hesperus, that led 
The starry host, rode brightest, till the Moon, 
Rising in clouded majesty, at length 
Apparent queen, unveiled her peerless light, 
And o'er the dark her silver mantle threw ; 
When Adam thus to Eve : " Fair consort, the hour 610 
Of night, and all things now retired to rest, 
Mind us of like repose, since God hath set 
Labour and rest, as day and night, to men 
Successive; and the timely dew of sleep, 
Now falling with soft slumberous weight, inclines 
Our eye-lids. Other creatures all day long 



Il8 PARADISE LOST. 

Rove idle, unemployed, and less need rest; 

Man hath his daily work of body or mind 

Appointed, which declares his dignity, 

And the regard of Heaven on all his ways; 620 

While other animals unactive range, 

And of their doings God takes no account. 

To-morrow, ere fresh morning streak the east 

With first approach of light, we must be risen, 

And at our pleasant labour, to reform 

Yon flowery arbours, yonder alleys green, 

Our walk at noon, with branches overgrown, 

That mock our scant manuring, and require 

More hands than ours to lop their wanton growth. 

Those blossoms also, and those dropping gums, 63* 

That lie bestrewn, unsightly and unsmooth, 

Ask riddance, if we mean to tread with ease; 

Meanwhile, as Nature wills, night bids us rest." 

To whom thus Eve, with perfect beauty adorned : 
f* 1 My author and disposer, what thou bidd'st 
c i Unargued I obey ; so God ordains : 
God is thy law, thou mine : to know no more 
15s woman's happiest knowledge, and her praise. 
With thee conversing I forget all time, 
All seasons and their change: all please alike. 640 

Sweet is the breath of Morn, her rising sweet, 
With charm of earliest birds; pleasant the Sun, 
When first on this delightful land he spreads 
His orient beams, on herb, tree, fruit, and flower, 
Glistering with dew; fragrant the fertile Earth 
After soft showers ; and sweet the coming-on 
Of grateful Evening mild ; then silent Night, 
With this her solemn bird, and this fair Moon, 
And these the gems of Heaven, her starry train: 



BOOK IV. IIQ 

But neither breath of Morn, when she ascends 650 

With charm of earliest birds ; nor rising Sun 

On this delightful land; nor herb, fruit, flower, 

Glistering with dew ; nor fragrance after showers ; 

Nor grateful Evening mild; nor silent Night, 

With this her solemn bird; nor walk by moon, 

Or glittering star-light, without thee is sweet. 

But wherefore all night long shine these? for whom 

This glorious sight, when sleep hath shut all eyes?" 

To whom our general ancestor replied : 
" Daughter of God and Man, accomplished Eve, 660 

Those have their course to finish round the Earth 
By morrow evening, and from land to land 
In order, though to nations yet unborn, 
Ministering light prepared, they set and rise; 
Lest total Darkness should by night regain 
Her old possession, and extinguish life 
In nature and all things ; which these soft fires 
Not only enlighten, but with kindly heat 
Of various influence foment and warm, 
Temper or nourish, or in part shed down 670 

Their stellar virtue on all kinds that grow 
On Earth, made hereby apter to receive 
Perfection from the sun's more potent ray. 
These then, though unbeheld in deep of night, 
Shine not in vain. Nor think, though men were none, 
That Heaven would want spectators, God want praise. 
Millions of spiritual creatures walk the Earth 
Unseen, both when we wake, and when we sleep : 
All these with ceaseless praise his works behold, 
Both day and night. How often, from the steep 680 
Of echoing hill or thicket, have we heard 
Celestial voices to the midnight air, 



I2O PARADISE LOST. 

Sole, or responsive each to other's note, 
Singing their great Creator ! Oft in bands 
While they keep watch, or nightly rounding walk, 
With heavenly touch of instrumental sounds 
In full harmonic number joined, their songs 
Divide the night, and lift our thoughts to Heaven." 

f Thus talking, hand in hand alone they passed 

[jOn to their blissful bower. It was a place 690 

Chosen by the sovran Planter, when he framed 
All things to Man's delightful use. The roof 
Of thickest covert was inwoven shade, 
Laurel and myrtle, and what higher grew 
Of firm and fragrant leaf; on either side 
Acanthus, and each odorous bushy shrub, 
Fenced up the verdant wall; each beauteous flower, 
Iris all hues, roses, and jessamine, 

Reared high their flourished heads between, and wrought 
Mosaic; under-foot the violet, 700 

Crocus, and hyacinth, with rich inlay 
Broidered the ground, more coloured than with stone 
Of costliest emblem. Other creature here, 
Beast, bird, insect, or worm, durst enter none ; 
Such was their awe of Man. In shadier bower 
More sacred and sequestered, though but feigned, 
Pan or Sylvanus never slept, nor Nyjoph 
t Nor Fauntnr"riaunted. Here, in close recess, 
 With ^flowers, garlands, and sweet-smelling herbs 

I Espoused Eve decked first her nuptial bed, 710 

 And Heavenly choirs the hymenaean sung, 

Vwhat day the genial Angel to our sire 
v |B rough t her, in naked beauty more adorned, 

iMore lovely, than Pandora, whom the gods 

(Endowed with all their gifts ; and, O ! too like 



BOOK IV. 121 

In sad event, when, to the unwiser son 
Of Japhet brought by Hermes~she ensnared 
Mankind with her fair looks, to be avenged 
On him who had stole Jove's authentic fire. 

Thus at their shady lodge arrived, both stood, 720 

Both turned, and under open sky adored 
The God that made both sky, air, Earth, and Heaven, 
Which they beheld, the moon's resplendent globe, 
And starry pole : " Thou also madest the night, 

r Maker Omnipotent; and thou the day, 
Which we, in our appointed work employed, 
Have finished, happy in our mutual help 
And mutual love, the crown of all our bliss 
Ordained by thee; and this delicious place, 
For us too large, where thy abundance wants 730 

Partakers, and uncropt falls to the ground. 
But thou hast promised from us two a race 
To fill the Earth, who shall with us extol 
Thy goodness infinite, both when we wake, 
And when we seek, as now, thy gift of sleep." 

This said unanimous, and other rites 
Observing none but adoration pure, 
Which God likes best, into their inmost bower 
Handed they went; and, eased the putting-off 
These troublesome disguises which we wear, 740 

Straight side by side were laid; nor turned, I ween, 

fAdam from his fair spouse, nor Eve the rites 

i Mysterious of connubial love refused : 
Whatever hypocrites austerely talk 
Of purity, and place, and innocence, 
Defaming as impure what God declares 
Pure, and commands to some, leaves free to all. 
Our Maker bids increase; who bids abstain 



122 PARADISE LOST. 

But our destroyer, foe to God and Man? 
T Hail, wedded Love, mysterious law, true source 750 

u Of human offspring, sole propriety 
L In Paradise of all things common else ! 

fBy thee adulterous lust was driven from men 
Among the bestial herds to range ; by thee, 

< Founded in reason, loyal, just, and pure, 
Relations dear, and all the charities 
Of father, son, and brother, first were known. 
Far be it that I should write thee sin or blame, 
Or think thee unbefitting holiest place, 
Perpetual fountain of domestic sweets, 760 

Whose bed is undefiled and chaste pronounced, 
Present or past, as saints and patriarchs used. 

jHere Love his golden shafts employs, here lights 
His constant lamp, and waves his purple wings, 
Reigns here and revels : not in the bought smile 

j Of harlots, loveless, joyless, unendeared, 

 Casual fruition; nor in court-amours, 
Mixed dance, or wanton mask, or midnight ball, 
n Or serenate, which the starved lover sings 

To his proud fair, best quitted with disdain. 770 

These, lulled by nightingales, embracing slept, 
And on their naked limbs the flowery roof 

[Showered roses, which the mom repaired. Sleep on, 
Blest pair ! and, O i yet happiest, if ye seek 
No happier state, and know to know no more ! 

Now had night measured with her shadowy cone 
Half-way up-hill this vast sublunar vault; 
And from their ivory port the Cherubim 
Forth issuing, at the accustomed hour, stood armed 
To their night-watches in warlike parade; 780 

When Gabriel to his next in power thus spake: 



BOOK IV. 

" ..Uzziel, halfjthese dra^vjjff^and coast the south 
With strictest watch; these other wheel the north: 
Our circuit meets full west." As flame they part, 
Half wheeling to the shield, half to the spear. 
From these, two strong and subtle Spirits he called 
That near him stood, and gave them thus in charge : 

"fchuriel and Zephon, with winged speed 
Search through tins garden ; leave unsearched no nook ; 
But chiefly where those two fair creatures lodge, 790 

Now laid perhaps asleep, secure of harm. 
This evening from the sun's decline arrived 
Who tells of some infernal Spirit seen 
Hitherward bent (who could have thought?), escaped 
The bars of Hell, on errand bad, no doubt: 
Such, where ye find, seize fast, and hither bring." 

So saying, on he led his radiant files, 
Dazzling the moon ; these to the bower direct 
In search of whom they sought. Him there they found 
Squat like a toad, close at the ear of Eve, 800 

Assaying by his devilish art to reach 
The organs of her fancy, and with them forge 
Illusions as he list, phantasms and dreams; 
Or if, inspiring venom, he might taint 
The animal spirits, that from pure blood arise 
Like gentle breaths from rivers pure, thence raise 
_ At least distempered, discontented thoughts, J 

Vain hopes, vain aims, inordinate desires, 
' Blown up with high conceits engendering pridej) 

Him thus intent Ithuriel with his spear 810 

Touched lightly; for no falsehood can endure 

Touch of celestial temper, but returns 

Of force to its own likeness : up he starts, 

Discovered and surprised. As when a spark 



124 PARADISE LOST. 

Lights on a heap of nitrous powder, laid 

Fit for the tun, some magazine to store 

Against a rumoured war, the smutty grain, 

With sudden blaze diffused, inflames the air: 

So started up in his own shape the Fiend. 

Back stept those two fair Angels, half amazed 820 

So sudden to behold the grisly King; 

Yet thus, unmoved with fear, accost him soon : 

"Which of those rebel Spirits adjudged to Hell 
Com'st thou, escaped thy prison? and, transformed, 
Why sat'st thou like an enemy in wait, 
Here watching at the head of these that sleep?" 

"Know ye not, then," said Satan, filled with scorn, 
"Know ye not me? Ye knew me once no mate 
For you, there sitting where ye durst not soar ! 
Not to know me argues yourselves unknown, 830 

The lowest of your throng ; or if ye know, 
Why ask ye, and superfluous begin 
Your message, like to end as much in vain?" 

To whom thus Zephon, answering scorn with scorn : 
"Think not, revolted Spirit, thy shape the same, 
Or undiminished brightness, to be known 
As when thou stood'st in Heaven upright and pure. 
That glory then, when thou no more wast good, 
Departed from thee; and thou resemblest now 
Thy sin and place of doom obscure and foul. 840 

But come; for thou, be sure, shalt give account 
To him who sent us, whose charge is to keep 
This place inviolable, and these from harm." 

So spake the Cherub; and his grave rebuke, 
Severe in youthful beauty, added grace 
Invincible. Abashed the Devil stood, 
i And felt how awful goodness is, and saw 



BOOK IV. 125 

Virtue in her shape how lovely; saw, and pined 

His loss; but chiefly to find here observed 

His lustre visibly impaired; yet seemed 50 

Undaunted. " If I must contend, 5 ' said he, 

"Best with the best the sender, not the sent; 

Or all at once : more glory will be won, 

Or less be lost." "Thy fear," said Zephon bold, 

"Will save us trial what the least can do 

Single against thee, wicked and thence weak." 

The Fiend replied not, overcome with rage; 
But, like a proud steed reined, went haughty on, 
Champing his iron curb : to strive or fly 
He held it vain; awe from above had quelled 860 

His heart, not else dismayed. Now drew they nigh 
The western point, where those half-rounding guards 
Just met, and closing stood in squadron joined, 
Awaiting next command. To whom their chief, 
Gabriel, from the front thus called aloud : 

"O friends, I hear the tread of nimble feet 
Hasting this way, and now by glimpse discern 
Ithuriel and Zephon through the shade; 
And with them comes a third, of regal port, 
But faded splendour wan, who by his gait 870 

And fierce demeanour seems the Prince of Hell; 
Not likely to part hence without contest. 
Stand firm, for in his look, defiance lours." 

He scarce had ended, when those two approached, 
And brief related whom they brought, where found, 
How busied, in what form and posture couched. 
To whom, with stern regard, thus Gabriel spake : 
"Why hast thou, Satan, broke the bounds prescribed 
To thy transgressions, and disturbed the charge 
Of others, who approve not to transgress 880 



126 PARADISE LOST. 

By thy example, but have power and right 
To question thy bold entrance on this place? 
Employed, it seems, to violate sleep, and those 
Whose dwelling God hath planted here in bliss." 

To whom thus Satan, with contemptuous brow : 
"Gabriel, thou hadst in Heaven the esteem of wise, 
And such I held thee; but this question asked 
Puts me in doubt. Lives there who loves his pain? 
Who would not, finding way, break loose from Hell, 
Though thither doomed? Thou wouldst thyself, no doubt, 890 
And boldly venture to whatever place 
Farthest from pain, where thou mightst hope to change 
Torment with ease, and soonest recompense 
Dole with delight ; which in this place I sought : 
To thee no reason, who know'st only good, 
But evil hast not tried. And wilt object 
His will who bound us? let him surer bar 
His iron gates, if he intends our stay 
In that dark durance. Thus much what was asked : 
The rest is true, they found me where they say; 900 
But that implies not violence or harm." 

Thus he in scorn. The warlike Angel moved, 
Disdainfully half smiling, thus replied : 
"O loss of one in Heaven to judge of wise, 
Since Satan fell, whom folly overthrew, 
And now returns him from his prison scaped, 
Gravely in doubt whether to hold them wise 
Or not who ask what boldness brought him hither 
Unlicensed from his bounds in Hell prescribed ! 
So wise he judges it to fly from pain 910 

However, and to scape his punishment ! 
So judge thou still, presumptuous, till the wrath, 
Which thou incurr'st by flying, meet thy flight 



BOOK IV. 127 

Sevenfold, and scourge that wisdom back to Hell, 

Which taught thee yet no better, that no pain 

Can equal anger infinite provoked. 

But wherefore thou alone? wherefore with thee 

Came not all Hell broke loose? is pain to them 

Less pain, less to be fled? or thou than they 

Less hardy to endure? Courageous chief, 920 

The first in flight from pain, hadst thou alleged 

To thy deserted host this cause of flight, 

Thou surely hadst not come sole fugitive." 

To which the Fiend thus answered, frowning stern: 
"Not that I less endure, or shrink from pain, 
Insulting Angel ! well thou know'st I stood 
Thy fiercest, when in battle to thy aid 
The blasting vollied thunder made all speed, 
And seconded thy else not dreaded spear. 
But still thy words at random, as before, 930 

Argue thy inexperience what behoves, 
From hard assays and ill successes past, 
A faithful leader; not to hazard all 
Through ways of danger by himself untried. 
I therefore, I alone, first undertook 
To wing the desolate Abyss, and spy 
This new-created World, whereof in Hell 
Fame is not silent; here in hope to find 
Better abode, and my afflicted powers 
To settle here on Earth, or in mid air; 940 

Though for possession put to try once more 
What thou and thy gay legions dare against; 
Whose easier business were to serve their Lord 
High up in Heaven, with songs to hymn his throne, 
And practised distances to cringe, not fight." 



128 PARADISE LOST. 

To whom the warrior Angel soon replied: 
"To say and straight unsay, pretending first 
Wise to fly pain, professing next the spy, 
Argues no leader, but a liar traced, 

Satan; and couldst thou 'faithful' add? O name, 950 
O sacred name of faithfulness profaned ! 

Faithful fn whnm?^. ri, y m^nlHmm ^r fw j> 

Army of fiends, fit body to fit head, 

Was this your discipline and faith engaged, 

Your military obedience, to dissolve 

Allegiance to the acknowledged Power Supreme? 

And thou, sly hypocrite, who now wouldst seem 

Patron of liberty, who more than thou 

Once fawned, and cringed, and servilely adored 

Heaven's awful Monarch? wherefore, but in hope 960 

To dispossess him, and thyself to reign? 

But mark what I areed thee now : Avaunt ! 

Fly thither whence thou fledst. If from this hour 

Within these hallowed limits thou appear, 

Back to the infernal pit I drag thee chained, 

And seal thee so as henceforth not to scorn 

The facile gates of Hell too slightly barred." 

So threatened he; but Satan to no threats 
Gave heed, but waxing more in rage replied : 

"Then, when I am thy captive, talk of chains, 970 
Proud limitary Cherub ! but ere then 
Far heavier load thyself expect to feel 
From my prevailing arm, though Heaven's King 
Ride on thy wings, and thou with thy compeers, 
Used to the yoke, drawest his triumphant wheels 
In progress through the road of Heaven star-paved." 

While thus he spake, the angelic squadron bright 



BOOK IV. 129 

Turned fiery red, sharpening in mooned horns 

Their_ phalanx, and began to hem him round 

With p7>rtecT"s"pears, as thick as when a field 980 

Of Ceres ripe for harvest waving bends 

Her bearded grove of ears which way the wind 

Sways them; the careful ploughman doubting stands 

Lest on the threshing-floor his hopeful sheaves 

Prove chaff. On the other side, Satan, alarmed, 

Collecting all his might, dilated stood, 

Like TenerirT or Atlas, unremoved : 

His stature reached the sky, and grxJiis.. crest 

Sat Horror plumed ; nor wanted in his grasp 

What seemed both spear and shield. Now dreadful deeds 990 

Might have ensued: nor only Paradise, 

In this commotion, but the starry cope 

Of Heaven perhaps, or all the elements 

At least, had gone to wrack, disturbed and torn 

With violence of this conflict, had not soon 

The Eternal, to prevent such horrid fray, 

Hung forth in Heaven his golden scales, yet seen 

Betwixt Astraea and the Scorpion sign, 

Wherein all things created first he weighed, 

The pendulous round Earth with balanced air IOOG 

In counterpoise now ponders all events, 

Battles and realms. In these he put two weights, 

The sequel each of parting and of fight : 

The latter quick up flew, and kicked the beam; 

Which Gabriel spying thus bespake the Fiend : 

" Satan, I know thy strength, and thou know'st mine ; 
1 Neither our own, but given ; what folly then 
I To boast what arms can do ! since thine no more 
'Than Heaven permits, nor mine, though doubled now 



p. L. 



130 PARADISE LOST. 

To trample thee as mire. For proof look up, 1010 

And read thy lot in yon celestial sign, 

Where thou art weighed, and shown how light, how weak 

If thou resist." The Fiend looked up, and knew 

His mounted scale aloft : nor more ; but fled 

Murmuring, and with him fled the shades of night. 



BOOK V. 



92 



THE ARGUMENT. 



Morning approached, Eve relates to Adam her troublesome dream ; 
he likes it not, yet comforts her : they come forth to their day labours : 
their morning hymn at the door of their bower. CGod, to render Man 
inexcusable, sends Raphael to admonish him of his obedience, of his 
free estate, of his enemy near at hand who he is, and why his enemy, 
and whatever else may avail Adam to know v Raphael comes down to 
Paradise ; his appearance described ; his coming discerned by Adam 
afar off, sitting at the door of his bower; he goes out to meet him, 
brings him to his lodge, entertains him with the choicest fruits of 
Paradise got together by Eve ; their discourse at table. Raphael 
performs his message, minds Adam of his state and of his enemy ; 
relates, at Adam's request, who that enemy is, and how he came to be 
so, beginning from his first revolt in Heaven, and the occasion thereof; 
how he drew his legions after him to the parts of the North, and there 
incited them to rebel with him, persuading all but only Abdiel, a Seraph, 
who in argument dissuades and opposes him, then forsakes him. 



BOOK V. 



NOW Morn, her rosy steps in the eastern clime 
Advancing, sowed the earth with orient pearl, 
When Adam waked, so customed ; for his sleep 
Was aery light, from pure digestion bred, 
And temperate vapours bland, which the only sound 
Of leaves and fuming rills, Aurora's fan, 
Lightly dispersed, and the shrill matin song 
Of birds on every bough ; so much the more 
His wonder was to find unwakened Eve 
With tresses discomposed, and glowing cheek, 
j~As through unquiet rest. He, on his side 
 Leaning half-raised, with looks of cordial love 
Hung over her enamoured, and beheld 
Beauty, which, whether waking or asleep, 
^ LShot forth peculiar graces; then, with voice 
Mild as when Zephyrus on Flora breathes, 
Her hand soft touching, whispered thus : " Awake, 
My fairest, my espoused, my latest found, 
Heaven's last, best gift, my ever-new delight ! 
Awake ! the morning shines, and the fresh field 
Calls us; we lose the prime, to mark how spring 
Our tended plants, how blows the citron grove, 



10 



20 



1 



134 PARADISE LOST. 

What drops the myrrh, and what the balmy reed, 
How Nature paints her colours, how the bee 
Sits on the bloom extracting liquid sweet." 

Such whispering waked her, but with startled eye 
On Adam, whom embracing, thus she spake : 
[~ "O sole in whom my thoughts find all repose, 
My glory, my perfection ! glad I see 
Thy face, and morn returned; for I this night 30 

(Such night till this I never passed) have dreamed, 
If dreamed, not, as I oft am wont, of thee, 
Works of day past, or morrow's next design, 
But of offence and trouble, which my mind 
Knew never till this irksome night. Methought, 
Close at mine ear one called me forth to walk 
With gentle voice; I thought it thine. It said, 
'Why sleep'st thou, Eve? now is the pleasant time, 
The cool, the silent, save where silence yields 
To the night- warbling bird, that now awake 40 

Tunes sweetest his love-laboured song; now reigns 
Full-orbed the moon, and, with more pleasing light, 
Shadowy sets off the face of things in vain, 
If none regard. Heaven wakes with all his eyes, 
Whom to behold but thee, Nature's desire, 
In whose sight all things joy, with ravishment 
Attracted by thy beauty still to gaze?' 
I rose as at thy call, but found thee not: 
To find thee I directed then my walk ; 
And on, methought, alone I passed through ways 50 

That brought me on a sudden to the Tree """x. 
Of interdicted Knowledge. Fair it seemed, ) 

Much fairer to my fancy than by day; 
And, as I wondering looked, beside it stood 
One shaped and winged like one of those from Heaven 



BOOK V. 135 

3y us oft seen : his dewy locks distilled 
Ambrosia. On that Tree he also gazed; 
And, 'O fair plant,' said he, 'with fruit surcharged, 
Deigns none to ease thy load and taste thy sweet, 

r god, nor man? Is knowledge so despised? 60 

)r envy, or what reserve forbids to taste? 

brbid who will, 'none shall from me withhold 

Conger thy offered good, why else set here?' 
':fhis said, he paused not, but with venturous arm 
tie plucked, he tasted. Me damp horror chilled 
Ae* such bold words vouched with a deed so bold ; 
But he thus, overjoyed : ' O fruit divine, 
Sweet of thyself, but much more sweet thus cropped, 
Forbidden here, it seems, as only fit 
For gods, yet able to make gods of men ! 70 

And why not gods of men, since good, the more 
Communicated, more abundant grows, 
The author not impaired, but honoured more? 
Here, happy creature, fair angelic Eve, 
Partake thou also : happy though thou art, 
Happier thou may'st be, worthier canst not be ; 
Taste this, and be henceforth among the gods 
Thyself a goddess ; not to Earth confined, 
But sometimes in the Air, as we; sometimes 
Ascend to Heaven, by merit thine, and see So 

What life the gods live there, and such live 
So saying, he drew nigh, and to me held, 
Even to my mouth of that same fruit held part 
Which he had plucked ; the pleasant savoury smell 
So quickened appetite that I, methought, 
Could not but taste. Forthwith up to the clouds 
With him I flew, and underneath beheld 
The Earth outstretched immense, a prospect wide 



136 PARADISE LOST. 

And various : wondering at my flight and change 
To this high exaltation, suddenly 90 

My guide was gone, and I, methought, sunk down, 
And fell asleep ; but, O, how glad I waked 
To find this but a dream !" Thus Eve her night 
J Related, and thus Adam answered sad: 
V" " Best image of myself, and dearer half, 
^The trouble of thy thoughts this night in sleep 
" ^Affects me equally; nor can I like 

This uncouth dream, of evil sprung, I fear; 
Yet evil whence ? in thee can harbour none, 



< 

. it 
-Created pure. But know that in the soul 100 

Are many lesser faculties, that serve 
Reason as chief; among these Fancy next 
Her office holds ; of all external things, 
Which the five watchful senses represent, 
She forms imaginations, aery shapes, 
Which Reason, joining or disjoining, frames 
All what we affirm or what deny, and call 
Our knowledge or opinion; then retires 
Into her private cell when Nature rests. 
Oft in her absence mimic Fancy wakes no 

To imitate her; but, misjoining shapes, 
Wild work produces oft, and most in dreams, 
111 matching words and deeds long past or late. 
..Some such resemblances, methinks, I find 
* ! Of our last evening's talk in this thy dream, 
^"But with addition strange; yet be not sad: 
Evil into the mind of god or man 
May come and go, so unapproved, and leave 
No spot or blame behind; which gives me hope 
That what in sleep thou didst abhor to dream, 120 

Waking thou never wilt consent to do. 






BOOK V. 137 

Be not disheartened, then, nor cloud those looks, 
That wont to be more cheerful and serene 
Than when fair Morning first smiles on the world ; 
And let us to our fresh employments rise 
Among the groves, the fountains, and the flowers, 
That open now their choicest bosomed smells, 
Reserved from night, and kept for thee in store." 
' So cheered he his fair spouse, and she was cheered, 
But silently a gentle tear let fall 130 

From either eye, and wiped them with her hair; 
Two other precious drops that ready stood, 
Each in their crystal sluice, he, ere they fell, 
) Kissed as the gracious signs of sweet remorse 
i And pious awe, that feared to have offended. 

So all was cleared, and to the field they haste. 
But first, from under shady arborous roof 
Soon as they forth were come to open sight 
Of day-spring, and the sun who, scarce uprisen, 
With wheels yet hovering o'er the ocean-brim, 140 

Shot parallel to the Earth his dewy ray, 
Discovering in wide landskip all the east 
-> <: > Of Paradise and Eden's happy plains 
Lowly they bowed adoring, and began 
Their orisons, each morning duly paid 
In various style; for neither various style 
Nor holy rapture wanted they to praise 
Their Maker, in fit strains pronounced, or sung 
Unmeditated ; such prompt eloquence 
Flowed from their lips, in prose or numerous verse, 150 
More tuneable than needed lute or harp 
To add more sweetness : and they thus began : 

"These are thy glorious works, Parent of good, 
Almighty! thine this universal frame, 



PARADISE LOST. 

Thus wondrous fair : thyself how wondrous then ! 
Unspeakable ! who sitt'st above these Heavens 

KTo us invisible, or dimly seen 
In these thy lowest works; yet these declare 
Thy goodness beyond thought, and power oliyiae. 
Sneak, ye who best can tell, ye Sons of 'Cjght, 160 

Angels, for ye behold him, and with v songs 
And ^choral symphonies^ clay without night, v 
Circle his throne rejoicing ye in Heaven; 
On Earthjoin, all ye creatures, to extol 
Him first, hii_ last, him piidst, and without end. 
Fairest_pf(^arsjlast in the train of nightT~T~" 
If better thou belong^iotTo the^-d 
Sure pledge oFclay, th^c crown'sTtKe smiling M< 
With thy brighrliirclSt, praise him in thj 

risjsrthat sweet hour (^fjprime. 170 

^ _ if this great world both eye and soul, 

Acknowledge him thy greater; sound his praise 

In thy eternaljcourse, both when thou< 

And whertiigri noon) hast gained, a.n.cl^when tboujall'st? 

that now^ meet'st the oi?nt jiun, now fliest, 
the fixed^starsj) fixed in thek.^prb that flies, 
And_ye_jfive other wanderin jf^Fires, that move 
In^ rtiystic danoe ^ot without~5png, resound ^^^ 
is^ praise who out ^Cdarkness) called u^^lightj 

y^ElemQnts^me~eldest birth 180 

Of Nature's woiiiab, that ID quaternion run 
PerpetuaL^rcle%iultiform, and mix 
And nounsn~all things, let your ceaseless change 
Vary to our great Maker still new praise. 
Ye Mists and Exhalations, that now rise 
From hil,l -orxsteaming lake, dusky or gray, 
Till th^sun rjaint your fleecy skirts 



BOOK V. 139 

In honour to thje world's great Author rise; 

Whether to deck w&h .clouds the uncoloured sky, 

Or wet the thirsty earth with falling showers, 190 

Rising or falling still advance his praise. 

His praise, ye Winds, that from four quarters blow, 

Breathe soft or loud; and wave your tops, y 

With every^ pliant, in sign of worship wave. 

OFountains, and ye that warble, as ye flow, 
ftfrelotlTous murmurs, warbling tune his praise. 
Join voices, all ye living Souls ; ye Birds, : 
That singing up to Heaven-gate ascend, 
Bear on your wings and in your notes his praise. 
Ye that c in waters %lide, and ye that walk 200 

The earth, and stately tread, or lowly creep, 
Witness if I be silent, morn or even, 
To hill or valley, fountain, or fresh shade,__ 
Macfeyocal by my song, and taught his praise. 
Hail, universal Lord! be bounteous still 
To give us only^goocj); and if the night 
Have gathered aught of evil, or concealed, 
Disperse it, as novMigFit> dispels thej^flark.^ 
V ' ( So prayed they innocent, and to their thoughts 

Firm peace Tecovered soon, and ^wpjitecl^cjiliri^ 210 

On to their morning's rural work they haste, 
Among sweet dews_jind_flQwei:s ; where _any row 
Of fruit-treesjover-woody reacheoVtoo far ^ 

"Their pampered boughs, and neeoeTt hands to check 

' Fruitless embraces : or they led the vine 

 To wed her elm ; she, spoused, about him twines 
Her marriageable arms, and with her brings 
Her dower, the adopted clusters, to adorn 

[His barren leaves. Them thus employed beheld 
With pity Heaven's high King, and to him called 220 



T I4O PARADISE LOST. 

I Raphael, the sociable Spirit, that deigned 
K To travel with Tobias, and secured 

{ His marriage with the seven-times-wedded maid. 

"Raphael," said he, "thou hear'st what stir on Earth 
Satan, from Hell scaped through the darksome gulf, 

. Hath raised in Paradise, and how disturbed 
This night the human pair; how he designs 

Y In them at once to ruin all mankind. 
Go, therefore, half this day, as friend with friend, 
Converse with Adam, in what bower or shade 230 

Thou find'st him from the heat of noon retired 
To respite his day-labour with repast 
Or with repose; and such discourse bring on 

IAs may advise him of his happy state 
Happiness in his power left free to will, 
Left to his own free will, his will though free 
Yet mutable; whence warn him to beware 
He swerve not, too secure. Tell him withal 
His danger, and from whom; what enemy, 
Late fallen himself from Heaven, is plotting now 240 
The fall of others from like state of bliss; 
By violence? no, for that shall be withstood; 
But by deceit and lies. This let him know, 
Lest wilfully transgressing he pretend 
Surprisal, unadmonished, unfore warned." 

So spake the Eternal Father, and fulfilled 
All justice; nor delayed the winged Saint 
After his charge received; but from among 
Thousand celestial Ardours, where he stood 
Veiled with his gorgeous wings, upspringing light, 250 
Flew through the midst of Heaven ; the angelic quires, 
On each hand parting, to his speed gave way 
Through all the empyreal road, till, at the gate 



BOOK V. I4I 

Of Heaven arrived, the gate self-opened wide, 

On golden hinges turning, as by work 

Divine the sovran Architect had framed. 

From hence no cloud or, to obstruct his sight, 

Star interposed, however small he sees, 

Not unconform to other shining globes, 

Earth, and the Garden* of God, with cedars crowned 260 

Above ^11 hills ; as when by. night -the_glass- 

Of Galileo, less assured^" observes 

Imagined lands and regions in the moon; 

Qr_pi,lo from amidst the Cyclades 

Delos or Samos first appearing kens, 

A cloudy spot. Down thither prone in flight 

He speeds, and through the vast ethereal sky 

Sails between worlds and worlds, with steady wing 

Now on the polar winds ; then with quick fan 

Winnows the buxom air, till, within soar 270 

Of towering eagles, to all the fowls he seems 

A phcenix gazed by all, as that sole bird, 

When, to enshrine his re-liques in the Sun's 

Bright temple, to Egyptian Thebes he flies. 

At once on the eastern cliff of Paradise 

He lights, and to his proper shape returns, 

A Seraph winged. Six wings he wore, to shade 

His lineaments divine : the pair that clad 

Each shoulder broad came mantling o'er his breast 

With regal ornament; the middle pair 280 

Girt like a starry zone his waist, and round 

Skirted his loins and thighs with downy gold 

And colours dipt in heaven; the third his feet 

Shadowed from either heel with feathered mail, 

Sky-tinctured grain. Like Maia's son he stood, 

And shook his plumes, that heavenly fragrance filled 



142 PARADISE LOST. 

The circuit wide. Straight knew him all the bands 

Of Angels under watch; and to his state 

And to his message high in honour rise ; 

For on some message high they guessed him bound. 290 

Their glittering tents he passed, and now is .come 

Into the blissful field, through groves of myrrh, 

And flowering odours, cassia, nard, and balm, 

A wilderness of sweets ; for Nature here 

Wantoned as in her prime, and played at will 

Her virgin fancies, pouring forth more sweet, 

Wild above rule or art, enormous bliss. 

Him, through the spicy forest onward come, 

Adam discerned, as in the door he sat 

| Of his cool bower, while now the mounted sun 300 

: Shot down direct his fervid rays, to warm 
Earth's inmost womb, more warmth than Adam needs ; 
And Eve within, due at her hour, prepared 

i^or dinner savoury fruits, of taste to please 
True appetite, and not disrelish thirst 
Of nectarous draughts between, from milky stream, 
Berry or grape : to whom thus Adam called : 

"Haste hither, Eve, and, worth thy sight, behold 
Eastward among those trees what glorious shape 
Comes this way moving; seems another morn ^$* 310 
Risen on mid-noon; some great behest from Heaven 

o us perhaps he brings, and will vouchsafe 
This day to be our guest. But go with speed, 
And what thy stores contain bring forth, and pour 
Abundance, fit to honour and receive 
* I. Our heavenly stranger; well we may afford 
Our givers their own gifts, and large bestow 
From large bestowed, where Nature multiplies 
Her fertile growth, and by disburdening grows 



BOOK V. 143 

More fruitful ; which instructs us not to spare." 320 

To whom thus Eve : " Adam, Earth's hallowed mould, 
Of God inspired, small store will serve where store, 
All seasons, ripe for use hangs on the stalk; 
Save what by frugal storing firmness gains 
To nourish, and superfluous moist consumes. 

' But I will haste, and from each bough and brake, 

Each plant and juiciest gourd, will pluck such choice 
.g. 1 To entertain our Angel-guest, as he 

Beholding shall confess that here on Earth 

' JGod hath dispensed his bounties as in Heaven." 330 

So saying, with dispatchful looks in haste 

f She turns, on hospitable thoughts intent, 
What choice to choose for delicacy best, 

I What order, so contrived as not to mix 
Tastes, not well joined, inelegant, but bring 
Taste after taste upheld with kindliest change : 
Bestirs her then, and from each tender stalk 
Whatever Earth, all-bearing mother, yields 

 In India-East or West, .or middle shore, 

Vln Pgntus^or the ^unic coast, or where 340 

Alcinpus. reigned, fxtUt^CSTkinds, in coat 
.Rough or smooth-rined, or bearded husk, or shell, 
She gathers, tribute large, and on the board 
Heaps with unsparing hand. For drink the grape 
She crushes, inoffensive must, and meaths 
From many a berry, and from sweet kernels pressed 
She tempers dulcet creams nor these to hold 
Wants her fit vessels pure; then strews the ground 
With rose and odours from the shrub unfumed. 

Meanwhile our primitive great Sire, to meet 350 

His godlike guest, walks forth, without more train 
Accompanied than with his own complete 



144 PARADISE LOST. 

Perfections ; in himself was all his state, 

More solemn than the tedious pomp that waits 

On princes, when their rich retinue long 

Of horses led, and grooms besmeared with gold, 

Dazzles the crowd, and sets them all agape. 

Nearer his presence, Adam, though not awed, 

Yet with submiss approach and reverence meek, 

As to a superior nature, bowing low, 360 

Thus said : " Native of Heaven (for other place 

None can than Heaven such glorious shape contain), 

Since, by descending from the Thrones above, 

Those happy places thou hast deigned a while 

To want, and honour these, vouchsafe with us, 

Two only, who yet by sovran gift possess 

This spacious ground, in yonder shady bower 

To rest, and what the Garden choicest bears 

To sit and taste, till this meridian heat 

Be over, and the sun more cool decline." 370 

Whom thus the angelic Virtue answered mild : 
"Adam, I therefore came; nor art thou such 
Created, or such place hast here to dwell, 
As may not oft invite, though Spirits of Heaven, 
To visit thee; lead on, then, where thy bower 
O'ershades; for these mid-hours, till evening rise, 
I have at will." So tq^the-syrvan lodge 
They came, that like Pomona's arbour smiled, 
With flowerets decked and fragrant smells; but Eve, 
Undecked save with herself, more lovely fair 380 

Than wood-nymph, or the fairest goddess feigned 
Of three that in Mount Ida naked strove, 
Stood to entertain her guest from Heaven ; no veil 
She needed, virtue-proof; no thought infirm 
Altered her cheek. On whom the Angel "Hail!" 



BOOK V. 145 

Bestowed, the holy salutation used 
Long after to blest Mary, second Eve: 
r" " Hail ! Mother of Mankind, whose fruitful womb 

Shall fill the world more numerous with thy sons 
! Than with these various fruits the trees of God 390 

I Have heaped this table ! " Raised of grassy turf 
Their table was, and mossy seats had round, 
And on her ample square from side to side 
All autumn piled, though spring and autumn here 
Danced hand-in-hand. A while discourse they hold 
No fear lest dinner cool when thus began 
Our Author: "Heavenly stranger, please to taste 
These bounties, which our Nourisher, from whom 
All perfect good, unmeasured-out, descends, 
To us for food and for delight hath caused 400 

The Earth to yield : unsavoury food, perhaps, 
To spiritual natures; only this I know, 
'That one celestial Father gives to all." 

To whom the Angel : " Therefore, what he gives 
(Whose praise be ever Sung) to Man, in part 
Spiritual, may of purest Spirits be found 
No ingrateful food : and food alike those pure 
Intelligential substances require 
As doth your rational; and both contain 
Within them every lower faculty 410 

Of sense, whereby they hear, see, smell, touch, taste, 
Tasting concoct, digest, assimilate, 
And corporeal to incorporeal turn. 
For know, whatever was created needs 
To be sustained and fed; of elements 
The grosser feeds the purer: earth the sea; 
Earth and the sea feed air; the air those fires 
Ethereal, and, as lowest, first the moon; 

P. L. 10 



146 PARADISE LOST. 

Whence in her visage round those spots, unpurged 

Vapours not yet into her substance turned. 420 

Nor doth the moon no nourishment exhale 

From her moist continent to higher orbs. 

The sun, that light imparts to all, receives 

From all his alimental recompense 

In humid exhalations, and at even 

Sups with the ocean. Though in Heaven the trees 

Of life ambrosial fruitage bear, and vines 

Yield nectar; though from off the boughs each morn 

We brush mellifluous dews, and find the ground 

Covered with pearly grain; yet God hath here 430 

Varied his bounty so with new delights 

As may compare with Heaven; and to taste 

Think not I shall be nice." So down they sat, 

And to their viands fell; nor seemingly 

The Angel, nor in mist the common gloss 

Of theologians but with keen dispatch 

Of real hunger, and concoctive heat 

To transubstantiate : what redounds transpires 

Through Spirits with ease; nor wonder, if by fire 

Of sooty coal the empiric alchemist 440 

Can turn, or holds it possible to turn, 

Metals of drossiest ore to perfect gold, 

from the mine. Meanwhile at table Eve 

[inistered naked, and their flowing cups 
With pleasant liquors crowned. O innocence 
>eserving Paradise ! If ever, then, 
Then had the Sons of God excuse to have been 
Enamoured at that sight; but in those hearts 
Love unlibidinous reigned, nor jealousy 
Was understood, the injured lover's hell. 450 

Thus when with meats and drinks they had sufficed, 



BOOK V. 

(Humaijrdened nature, sudden mind arose 

To ^ m not to let the occasion pass, 
Attendhim by this great conference, to know 
That t^gs above his world, and of their being 
That dwell in Heaven, whose excellence he saw 
Tb ans cend his own so far, whose radiant forms 
C'ivine effulgence whose high power, so far 
Exceeded human; and his wary speech 
Thus to the empyreal minister he framed : 460 

"Inhabitant with God, now know I well 
Thy favour, in this honour done to Man, 
Under whose lowly roof thou hast vouchsafed 
To enter, and these earthly fruits to taste, 
Food not of Angels, yet accepted so, 
As that more willingly thou couldst not seem 
At Heaven's high feasts to have fed : yet what compare?" 

To whom the winged Hierarch replied : 
"O Adam, one Almighty is, from whom 
All things proceed, and up to him return, 470 

If not depraved from good, created all 
Such to perfection, one first matter all, 
Endued with various forms, various degrees 
Of substance, and, in things that live, of life; 
But more refined, more spiritous and pure, 
As nearer to him placed or nearer tending, 
Each in their several active spheres assigned, 
Till body up to spirit work, in bounds 
Proportioned to each kind. So from the root 
Springs lighter the green stalk, from thence the leaves 480 
More aery, last the bright consummate flower 
Spirits odorous breathes : flowers and their fruit, 
Man's nourishment, by gradual scale sublimed, 
To vital spirits aspire, to animal, 



10 2 



148 PARADISE LOST. 

To intellectual; give both life and sense, 

Fancy and understanding; whence the soul 420 

Reason receives, and reason is her being, 

Discursive, or intuitive : discourse 

Is oftest yours, the latter most is ours, 

Differing but in degree, of kind the same. s 

Wonder not, then, what God for you saw good 

If I refuse not, but convert, as you, 

To proper substance. Time may come when men 

With Angels may participate, and find 

No inconvenient diet, nor too light fare; 

And from these corporal nutriments, perhaps, 

Your bodies may at last turn all to spirit, 

Improved by tract of time, and winged ascend 

Ethereal, as we; or may at choice 

Here or in heavenly Paradises dwell, 500 

If ye be found obedient, and retain 

Unalterably firm his love entire, 

Whose progeny you are. Meanwhile enjoy 

Your fill what happiness this happy state 

Can comprehend, incapable of more." 

To whom the Patriarch of Mankind replied : 
"O favourable Spirit, propitious guest, 
Well hast thou taught the way that might direct 
Our knowledge, and the scale of Nature set 
From centre to circumference, whereon, 510 

In contemplation of created things, 
By steps we may ascend to God. But say, 
What meant that caution joined, If ye be found 
r Obedient? Can we want oj^edience, then, 
To him, or possibly his love desert, 
Who formed us from the dust, and placed us here 
Full to the utmost measure of what bliss 



BOOK V. IAQ 

(Human desires can seek or apprehend?" ^F 

To whom the Angel : " Son of Heaven and Earth, 

Attend ! That thou art happy, owe to God ; 520 

That thou continuest such, owe to thyself, 

That is, to thy obedience; therein stand: 

This was that caution given thee; be advised^ 

God made thee perfect, not immutable; 

And good he made thee, but to persevere^! 

He left it in thy power ordained thy wilj 

By nature free, not over-ruled by fate 

Inextricable, or strict necessity. 

Our voluntary service he requires, 

Not our necessitated ; such with him  530 

Finds no acceptance, nor can find; for how 

Can hearts not free be tried whether they serve 

Willing or no, who will but what they must 

By destiny, and can no other choose? 

Myself, and all the angelic host, that stand 

In sight of God enthroned, our happy state 

Hold, as you yours, while our obedience hole 
n other surety none : freely we serve, 

Because we freely love, as in our will 

To love or not; in this we stand or fall. 540 

! And some are fallen, to disobedience fallen, 

And so from Heaven to deepest Hell: O fall 
, From what high state of bliss into what woe!" 
To whom our great Progenitor: "Thy words 

Attentive, and with more delighted ear, 

Divine instructor, I have heard, than when 

Cherubic songs by night from neighbouring hills 

Aerial music send; nor knew I not 

To be, both will and deed, created free. 
I Yet that we never shall forget to love 550 




 



150 PARADISE LOST. 

Our Maker, and obey him whose command 

Single is yet so just, my constant thoughts 

Assured me, and still assure; though what thou tell'st 

Hath passed in Heaven some doubt within me move, 

But more desire to hear, if thou consent, 

The full relation, which must needs be strange, 

Worthy of sacred silence to be heard. 

And we have yet large day, for scarce the sun 

Hath finished half his journey, and scarce begins 

His other half in the great zone of heaven." * 560 

Thus Adam made request; and Raphael, 
After short pause assenting, thus began : 

"High matter thou enjoin'st me, O prime of men, 
Sad task and hard; for how shall I relate 
To human sense the invisible exploits 
Of warring Spirits? how, without remorse, 
The ruin of so many, glorious once 
And perfect while they stood? how, last, unfold 
The secrets of another world, perhaps 
Not lawful to reveal? Yet for thy good 570 

This is dispensed, and what surmounts the reach 
Of human sense I shall delineate so, 
By likening spiritual to corporal forms, 
As may express them best though what if Earth 
Be but the shadow of Heaven, and things therein 
Each to other like, more than on Earth is thought! 

"As yet this world was not, and Chaos wild 
Reigned where these Heavens now roll, where Earth now 

rests 

Upon her centre poised; when on a day 
(For time, though in eternity, applied 580 

To motion, measures all things durable 
By present, past, and future), on such day 



BOOK V. 151 

As Heaven's great year brings forth, the empyreal host 

Of Angels, by imperial summons called, 

Innumerable before the Almighty's throne 

Forthwith from all the ends of Heaven appeared 

Under their Hierarchs in orders bright : 

Ten thousand thousand ensigns high advanced, 

Standards and gonfalons, 'twixt van and rear, 

Stream in the air, and for distinction serve 590 

Of Hierarchies, of orders, and degrees; 

Or in their glittering tissues bear emblazed 

Holy memorials, acts of zeal and love 

Recorded eminent. Thus when in orbs 

Of circuit inexpressible they stood, 

Orb within orb, the Father Infinite, 

By whom in bliss embosomed sat the Son, 

Amidst, as from a flaming mount, whose top 

Brightness had made invisible, thus spake: 

" * Hear, all ye Angels, progeny of light, 600 

Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers, 
Hear my decree, which unrevoked shall stand! 
This day I have begot whom I declare 
My only Son, and on this holy hill 
Him have anointed, whom ye now behold 
At my right hand; your head I him appoint, 
And by myself have sworn, to him shall bow 
All knees in Heaven, and shall confess him Lord. 
Under his great vicegerent reign abide 
United as one individual soul, 610 

For ever happy. Him who disobeys 
Me disobeys, breaks union, and that day, 
Cast out from God and blessed vision, falls 
Into utter darkness deep engulfed, his place 
Ordained without redemption, without end.' 



152 PARADISE LOST. 

" So spake the Omnipotent, and with his words 
All seemed well pleased; all seemed, but were not all. 
That day, as other solemn days, they spent 
In song and dance about the sacred hill; 
Mystical dance, which yonder starry sphere 620 

Of planets and of fixed in all her wheels 
Resembles nearest mazes intricate, 
Eccentric, intervolved, yet regular 
Then most when most irregular they seem ; 
And in their motions harmony divine 
So smooths her charming tones that God's own ear 
Listens delighted. Evening now approached 
(For we have also our evening and our morn, 
We ours for change delectable, not need), 
Forthwith from dance to sweet repast they turn 630 

Desirous : all in circles as they stood, 
Tables are set, and on a sudden piled 
With Angels' food, and rubied nectar flows 
In pearl, in diamond, and massy gold, 
Fruit of delicious vines, the growth of Heaven. 
On flowers reposed, and with fresh flowerets crowned, 
They eat, they drink, and in communion sweet 
Quaff immortality and joy, secure 
Of surfeit where full measure only bounds 
Excess, before the all-bounteous King, who showered 640 
With copious hand, rejoicing in their joy. 
Now when ambrosial night, with clouds exhaled 
From that high mount of God whence light and shade 
Spring both, the face of brightest Heaven had changed 
To grateful twilight (for night comes not there 
In darker veil), and roseate dews disposed 
A.11 but the unsleeping eyes of God to rest, 
Wide over all the plain, and wider far 



BOOK V. 153 

Than all this globous Earth in plain outspread 

(Such are the courts of God), the angelic throng, 650 

Dispersed in bands and files, their camp extend 

By living streams among the trees of life 

Pavilions numberless and sudden reared, 

Celestial tabernacles, where they slept 

Fanned with cool winds ; save those who, in their course, 

Melodious hymns about the sovran throne 

Alternate all night long. But not so waked 

Satan so call him now; his former name 

Is heard no more in Heaven. He, of the first, 

If not the first Archangel, great in power, 660 

In favour, and pre-eminence, yet fraught 

With envy against the Son of God, that day 

Honoured by his great Father, and proclaimed 

Messiah, King anointed, could not bear 

Through pride that sight, and thought himself impaired. 

Deep malice thence conceiving and disdain, 

Soon as midnight brought on the dusky hour 

Friendliest to sleep and silence, he resolved 

With all his legions to dislodge, and leave 

Unworshipped, unobeyed, the throne supreme, 670 

Contemptuous; and, his next subordinate 

Awakening, thus to him in secret spake : 

" ' Sleep'st thou. companion dear ? what sleep can close 
Thy eyelids? and rememberest what decree, 
Of yesterday, so late hath passed the lips 
Of Heaven's Almighty? Thou to me thy thoughts 
Wast wont, I mine to thee was wont, to impart; 
Both waking we were one ; how, then, can now 
Thy sleep dissent? New laws thou seest imposed: 
New laws from him who reigns new minds may raise 680 
In us who serve new counsels, to debate 



154 PARADISE LOST. 

What doubtful may ensue : more in this place 

To utter is not safe. Assemble thou 

Of all those myriads which we lead the chief; 

Tell them that by command^ere yet dim night 

Her shadowy cloud withdraws, I am tcTTjaste, 

And all who under me their banners wave, 

Homeward with flying march where we possess 

The quarters of the North, there to prepare 

Fit entertainment to receive our King, 690 

The great Messiah, and his new commands, 

Who speedily through all the Hierarchies 

Intends to pass triumphant, and give laws.' 

"So spake the false Archangel, and infused 
Bad influence into the unwary breast 
Of his associate. He together calls, 
Or several one by one, the regent powers, 
Under him regent; tells, as he was taught, 
That, the Most High commanding, now ere night, 
Now ere dim night had disencumbered Heaven, 700 

The great Hierarchal standard was to move; 
Tells the suggested cause, and casts between 
Ambiguous words and jealousies, to sound 
Or taint integrity. But all obeyed 
The wonted signal, and superior voice 
Of their great Potentate; for great indeed 
His name, and high was his degree in Heaven : 
His countenance, as the morning-star that guides 
The starry flock, allured them, and with lies 
Drew after him the third part of Heaven's host. 710 

Meanwhile, the Eternal eye, whose sight discerns 
Abstrusest thoughts, from forth his holy mount, 
And from within the golden lamps that burn 
Nightly before him, saw without their light 



BOOK V. 155 

Rebellion rising saw in whom, how spread 
Among the Sons of Morn, what multitudes 
Were banded to oppose his high decree; 
And, smiling, to his only Son thus said : 

" ' Son, thou in whom my glory I behold 
In full resplendence, Heir of all my might, 720 

Nearly it now concerns us to be sure 
Of our omnipotence, and with what arms 
We mean to hold what anciently we claim 
Of deity or empire : such a foe 
Is rising, who intends to erect his throne 
Equal to ours, throughout the spacious North; 
Nor so content, hath in his thought to try 
In battle what our power is or our right. 
Let us advise, and to this hazard draw 
With speed what force is left, and all employ 73 

In our defence, lest unawares we lose 
This our high place, our sanctuary, our hill.' 

"To whom the Son, with calm aspect and clear, 
Lightening divine, ineffable, serene, 
Made answer: 'Mighty Father, thou thy foes 
Justly hast in derision, and secure 
Laugh'st at their vain designs and tumults vain, 
Matter to me of glory, whom their hate 
Illustrates, when they see all regal power 
Given me to quell their pride, and in event 740 

Know whether I be dextrous to subdue 
Thy rebels, or be found the worst in Heaven.' 

"So spake the Son; but Satan with his powers f 
Far was advanced on winged speed, an host 
Innumerable as the stars of night, 
Or stars of morning, dew-drops which the sun 
Impearls on every leaf and every flower. 



156 PARADISE LOST. 

Regions they passed, the mighty regencies 

Of Seraphim and Potentates and Thrones 

In their triple degrees regions to which 750 

All thy dominion, Adam, is no more 

Than what this Garden is to all the earth 

And all the sea, from one entire globose 

Stretched into longitude; which having passed, 

At length into the limits of the North 

They came, and Satan to his royal seat 

High on a hill, far-blazing, as a mount 

Raised on a mount, with pyramids and towers 

From diamond quarries hewn and rocks of gold, 

The palace of great Lucifer (so call 760 

That structure, in the dialect of men 

Interpreted) which not long after he, 

Affecting all equality with God, 

In imitation of that mount whereon 

Messiah was declared in sight of Heaven, 

The Mountain of the Congregation called; 

For thither he assembled all his train, 

Pretending so commanded to consult 

About the great reception of their King, 

Thither to come ; and with calumnious art 770 

Of counterfeited truth thus held their ears : 

"'Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers, 
If these magnific titles yet remain 
Not merely titular, since by decree 
Another now hath to himself engrossed 
All power, and us eclipsed under the name 
Of King anointed; for whom all this haste 
Of midnight march, and hurried meeting here, 
This only to consult, how we may best, 
With what may be devised of honours new, 780 



BOOK V. 157 

Receive him coming to receive from us 

Knee-tribute yet unpaid, prostration vile ! 

Too much to one ! but double how endured 

To one and to his image now proclaimed? 

But what if better counsels might erect 

Our minds, and teach us to cast off this yoke ! 

Will ye submit your necks, and choose to bend 

The supple knee? Ye will not, if I trust 

To know ye right, or if ye know yourselves 

Natives and Sons of Heaven possessed before 790 

By none, and if not equal all, yet free, 

Equally free; for orders and degrees 

Jar not with liberty, but well consist. 

Who can in reason, then, or right, assume 

Monarchy over such as live by right 

His equals if in power and splendour less, 

In freedom equal? or can introduce 

Law and edict on us, who without law 

Err not? much less for this to be our Lord, 

And look for adoration, to the abuse 800 

Of those imperial titles which assert 

Our being ordained to govern, not to serve !' S 

"Thus far his bold discourse without control 
Had audience, when among the Seraphim 
Abdiel, than whom none with more zeal adored 
The Deity, and divine commands obeyed, 
Stood up, and in a flame of zeal severe 
The current of his fury thus opposed : 

" ' O argument blasphemous, false, and proud ! 
Words which no ear ever to hear in Heaven 810 

Expected, least of all from thee, ingrate, 
In place thyself so high above thy peers ! 
Canst thou with impious obloquy condemn 



I5& PARADISE LOST. 

The just decree of God, pronounced and sworn, 

That to his only Son, by right endued 

With regal sceptre, every soul in Heaven 

Shall bend the knee, and in that honour due 

Confess him rightful King? Unjust, thou say'st, 

Flatly unjust, to bind with laws the free, 

And equal over equals to let reign, 820 

One over all with unsucceeded power! 

Shalt thou give law to God? shalt thou dispute 

With Him the points of liberty, who made- '' 

Thee what thou art, and formed the powers of Heaven 

Such as he pleased, and circumscribed their being? 

Yet, by experience taught, we know how good, 

And of our good and of our dignity 

How provident he is how far from thought 

To make us less; bent rather to exalt 

Our happy state, under one head more near 830 

United. But to grant it thee unjust 

That equal over equals monarch reign : 

Thyself, though great and glorious, dost thou count, 

Or all angelic nature joined in one, 

Equal to him, begotten Son? by whom, 

As by his Word, the mighty Father made 

All things, even thee, and all the Spirits of Heaven 

By him created in their bright degrees, 

Crowned them with glory, and to their glory named 

Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers, 840 

Essential Powers; nor by his reign obscured, 

But more illustrious made; since he, the head, 

One of our number thus reduced becomes; 

His laws our laws; all honour to him done 

Returns our own. Cease, then, this impious rage, 

And tempt not these; but hasten to appease 



BOOK V. 



159 



The incensed Father and the incensed Son 
While pardon may be found, in time besought.' l 

"So spake the fervent Angel; but his zeal 
None seconded, as out of season judged, 850 

Or singular and rash; whereat rejoiced 
The Apostate, and more haughty thus replied : 

" ' That we were formed, then, say'st thou ? and the work 
Of secondary hands, by task transferred 
From Father to his Son ? Strange point and new ! 
Doctrine which we would know whence learned ! Who saw 
When this creation was? Remember'st thou 
Thy making, while the Maker gave thee being? 
We know no time when we were not as now; 
Know none before us, self-begot, self-raised 860 

By our own quickening power, when fatal course 
Had circled his full orb, the birth mature 
Of this our native Heaven, Ethereal Sons. 
Our puissance is our own; our own right hand 
Shall teach us highest deeds, by proof to try 
Who is our equal : then thou shalt behold 
Whether by supplication we intend 
Address, and to begirt the Almighty throne 
Beseeching or besieging. This report, 
These tidings, carry to the anointed King; 870 

And fly, ere evil intercept thy flight.' 

"He said; and, as the sound of waters deep, 
Hoarse murmur echoed to his words applause 
Through the infinite host; nor less for that 
The flaming Seraph, fearless, though alone, 
Encompassed round with foes, thus answered bold: 

" ' O alienate from God, O Spirit accursed, 
Forsaken of all good ! I see thy fall 
Determined, and thy hapless crew involved 



l6o PARADISE LOST. 



In this perfidious fraud, contagion spread 880 

Both of thy crime and punishment. Henceforth 
No more be troubled how to quit the yoke 
Of God's Messiah; those indulgent laws 
Will not be now vouchsafed; other decrees 
Against thee are gone forth without recall; 
That golden sceptre which thou didst reject 
Is now an iron rod to bruise and break 
Thy disobedience. Well thou didst advise; 
Yet nor for thy advice or threats I fly 
These wicked tents devoted, lest the wrath 890 

Impendent, raging into sudden flame, 
Distinguish not : for soon expect to feel 
His thunder on thy head, devouring fire. 
Then who created thee lamenting learn, 
When who can uncreate thee thou shalt know.' 
"So spake the Seraph Abdiel, faithful found; 
Among the faithless, faithful only he; 
Among innumerable false, unmoved, 
Unshaken, unseduced, unterrified, 

His loyalty he kept, his love, his zeal; 900 

Nor number nor example with him wrought 
To swerve from truth, or change his constant mind, 
Though single. From amidst them forth he passed, 
Long way through hostile scorn, which he sustained 
Superior, nor of violence feared aught; 
And with retorted scorn his back he turned 
On those proud towers, to swift destruction doomed." 



BOOK VI. 



P. L. U 



THE ARGUMENT. 



Raphael continues to relate how Michael and Gabriel were sent 
forth to battle against Satan and his Angels. The first fight described : 
Satan and his Powers retire under night ; he calls a council ; invents 
devilish engines, which, in the second day's fight, put Michael and his 
Angels to some disorder ; but they at length, pulling up mountains, 
overwhelmed both the force and machines of Satan. Yet, the tumult 
not so ending, God, on the third day, sends Messiah his Son, for whom 
he had reserved the glory of that victory. He, in the power of his 
Father, coming to the place, and causing all his legions to stand still on 
either side, with his chariot and thunder driving into the midst of his 
enemies, pursues them, unable to resist, towards the wall of Heaven ; 
which opening, they leap down with horror and confusion into the place 
of punishment prepared for them in the deep. Messiah returns with 
triumph to his Father. 



BOOK VI. 



1, night the dreadless Angel, unpursued, 
Through Heaven's wide champain held his way, 
till Morn, 

Waked by the circling) Hours, with 
Unbarred the gates of light. There is 'a cave 
Within the mount of God7fast by his throne, 
Where light and darkness. .in perpetu^TrQunJ 
Lodge and dislodge by turns, which makes through Heaven 
Grateful vicissitude, like day. and night ; 
Light issues forth, and at the other door 
Obsequious, darkness Centers, till her hour 10 

To veil the Heaven, though_jdarkness there might well 
Seem twilight" here. And now went forth the, "Morn - 
Such as in highest Heaven, arrayed in(goldL^ 
Empyreal; from before her vanished Night, 
Shot through with orient beams ; when all the plain 
Covered with thick embattled squadrons bright, 
Chariots, and flaming arms, and fiery steeds, 
Reflecting blaze on blaze, first met his view : 
War he perceived, war in procinct, and found 
Already known what he for news had thought 20 

To have reported; gladly then he mixed 

II 2 



PARADISE LOST. 

Among those friendly powers, who him received 
With joy and acclamations loud, that one, 
That of so many myriads fallen yet one, 
Returned not lost. On to the sacred hill 
They led him high applauded, and present 
Before the seat supreme ; from whence a voice, 
From midst a golden cloud, thus mild was heard : 

" * Servant of God, well done ! Well hast thou fought 
The better fight, who single hast maintained 30 

Against revolted multitudes the cause 
Of truth, in word mightier than they in arms; 
And for the testimony of truth hast borne 
Universal reproach, far worse to bear 
Than violence; for this was all thy care 
To stand approved in sight of God, though worlds 
Judged thee perverse. The easier conquest now 
Remains thee aided by this host of friends, 
Back on thy foes more glorious to return 
Than scorned thou didst depart, and to subdue 40 

By force who reason for their law refuse, 
Right reason for their law, and for their King 
Messiah, who by right of merit reigns. 
Go, Michael, of celestial armies prince, 
And thou, in military prowess next, 
Gabriel; lead forth to battle these my sons 
Invincible; lead forth my armed Saints, 
By thousands and by millions ranged for fight, 
Equal in number to that godless crew 
Rebellious; them with fire and hostile arms 50 

Fearless assault, and, to the brow of Heaven 
Pursuing, drive them out from God and bliss, 
Into their place of punishment, the gulf 
Of Tartarus, which ready opens wide 



BOOK VI. 165 

His fiery chaos to receive their fall.' 

"So spake the Sovran Voice, and clouds began 
To darken all the hill, and smoke to roll 
In dusky wreaths reluctant flames, the sign 
Of wrath awaked; nor with less dread the loud 
Ethereal trumpet from on high gan blow : 60 

At which command the powers militant 
That stood for Heaven, in mighty quadrate joined 
Of union irresistible, moved on 
In silence their bright legions, to the sound 
Of instrumental harmony, that breathed 
Heroic ardour to adventurous deeds 
Under their godlike leaders, in the cause 
Of God and his Messiah. On they move, 
Indissolubly firm ; nor obvious hill, 

Nor straitening vale, nor wood, nor stream, divides 70 
Their perfect ranks; for high above the ground 
Their march was, and the passive air upbore 
Their nimble tread; as when the total kind 
Of birds, in orderly array, on wing 
Came summoned over Eden to receive 
Their names of thee; so over many a tract 
Of Heaven they marched, and many a province wide, 
Tenfold the length of this terrene. At last, 
Far in the horizon to the North, appeared 
From skirt to skirt a fiery region, stretched 80 

In battailous aspect ; and, nearer view, 
Bristled with upright beams innumerable 
Of rigid spears, and helmets thronged, and shields 
Various, with boastful argument portrayed, 
The banded powers of Satan hasting on 
With furious expedition ; for they weened 
That self-same day, by fight or by surprise, 



1 66 PARADISE LOST. 

To win the mount of God, and on his throne 

To set the envier of his state, the proud 

Aspirer; but their thoughts proved fond and vain 90 

In the mid-way. Though strange to us it seemed 

At first that Angel should with Angel war, 

And in fierce hosting meet, who wont to meet 

So oft in festivals of joy and love 

Unanimous, as sons of one great Sire, 

Hymning the Eternal Father. But the shout 

Of battle now began, and rushing sound 

Of onset ended soon each milder thought. 

High in the midst, exalted as a god, 

The Apostate in his sun-bright chariot sat, 100 

Idol of majesty divine, enclosed 

With flaming Cherubim and golden shields ; 

Then lighted from his gorgeous throne, for now 

'Twixt host and host but narrow space was left, 

A dreadful interval, and front to front 

Presented stood, in terrible array 

Of hideous length. Before the cloudy van, 

On the rough edge of battle ere it joined, 

Satan, with vast and haughty strides advanced, 

Came towering, armed in adamant and gold. no 

Abdiel that sight endured not, where he stood 

Among the mightiest, bent on highest deeds, 

And thus his own undaunted heart explores : 

" ' O Heaven ! that such resemblance of the Highest 
Should yet remain, where faith and realty 
Remain not ! Wherefore should not strength and might 
There fail where virtue fails, or weakest prove 
Where boldest, though to sight unconquerable? 
His puissance, trusting in the Almighty's aid, 
I mean to try, whose reason I have tried 120 



BOOK VI. 167 

Unsound and false ; nor is it aught but just 
That he who in debate of truth hath won 
Should win in arms, in both disputes alike 
Victor; though brutish that contest and foul, 
When reason hath to deal with force, yet so 
Most reason is that reason overcome.' 

" So pondering, and from his armed peers 
Forth-stepping opposite, half-way he met 
His daring foe, at this prevention more 
Incensed, and thus securely him defied : 130 

" ' Proud, art thou met ? Thy hope was to have reached 
The highth of thy aspiring unopposed, 
The throne of God unguarded, and his side 
Abandoned at the terror of thy power 
Or potent tongue. Fool ! not to think how vain 
Against the Omnipotent to rise in arms; 
Who, out of smallest things, could without end 
Have raised incessant armies to defeat 
Thy folly; or with solitary hand, 

Reaching beyond all limit, at one blow, 140 

Unaided could have finished thee, and whelmed 
Thy legions under darkness ! But thou seest 
All are not of thy train; there be who faith 
Prefer, and piety to God, though then 
To thee not visible when I alone 
Seemed in thy world erroneous to dissent 
From all : my sect thou seest ; now learn too late 
How few sometimes may know, when thousands err.' 

"Whom the grand Foe, with scornful eye askance, 
Thus answered: '111 for thee, but in wished hour 150 
Of my revenge, first sought for, thou return'st 
From flight, seditious Angel, to receive 
Thy merited reward, the first assay 



1 68 PARADISE LOST. 

Of this right hand provoked, since first that tongue, 

Inspired with contradiction, durst oppose 

A third part of the gods, in synod met 

Their deities to assert ; who, while they feel 

Vigour divine within them, can allow 

Omnipotence to none. But well thou com'st 

Before thy fellows, ambitious to win 160 

From me some plume, that thy success may show 

Destruction to the rest. This pause between 

(Unanswered lest thou boast) to let thee know 

At first I thought that liberty and Heaven 

To heavenly souls had been all one ; but now 

I see that most through sloth had rather serve, 

Ministering Spirits, trained up in feast and song: 

Such hast thou armed, the minstrelsy of Heaven, 

Servility with freedom to contend, 

As both their deeds compared this day shall prove.' 170 

"To whom, in brief, thus Abdiel stern replied: 
* Apostate! still thou err'st, nor end wilt find 
Of erring, from the path of truth remote. 
Unjustly thou deprav'st it with the name 
Of servitude, to serve whom God ordains, 
Or Nature: God and Nature bid the same, 
When he who rules is worthiest, and excels 
Them whom he governs. This is servitude, 
To serve the unwise, or him who hath rebelled 
Against his worthier, as thine now serve thee, iSo 

Thyself not free, but to thyself enthralled; 
Yet lewdly dar'st our ministering upbraid. 
Reign thou in Hell, thy kingdom ; let me serve 
In Heaven God ever blest, and his divine 
Behests obey, worthiest to be obeyed; 
Yet chains in Hell, not realms, expect : meanwhile, 



BOOK VI. 



I6 9 



From me returned, as erst thou saidst, from flight, 
This greeting on thy impious crest receive.' 
"So saying, a noble stroke he lifted high, 
Which hung not, but so swift with tempest fell 190 

On the proud crest of Satan that no sight, 
Nor motion of swift thought, less could his shield, 
Such ruin intercept. Ten paces huge 
He back recoiled; the tenth on bended knee 
His massy spear upstayed : as if, on Earth, 
Winds under ground, or waters forcing way, 
Sidelong had pushed a mountain from his seat, 
Half-sunk with all his pines. Amazement seized 
The rebel Thrones, but greater rage, to see 
Thus foiled their mightiest; ours joy rilled, and shout, 
Presage of victory, and fierce desire 201 

Of battle : whereat Michael bid sound 
The Archangel trumpet; through the vast of Heaven 
It sounded, and the faithful armies rung 
Hosannah to the Highest ; nor stood at gaze 
The adverse legions, nor less hideous joined 
The horrid shock. Now storming fury rose, 
And clamour such as heard in Heaven till now 
Was never; arms on armour clashing brayed 
Horrible discord, and the madding wheels 210 

Of brazen chariots raged ; dire was the noise 
Of conflict; overhead the dismal hiss 
Of fiery darts in flaming volleys flew, 
And, flying, vaulted either host with fire. 
So under fiery cope together rushed 
Both battles main, with ruinous assault 
And inextinguishable rage; all Heaven 
Resounded, and, had Earth been then, all Earth 
Had to her centre shook. What wonder, when 



170 PARADISE LOST. 

Millions of fierce encountering Angels fought 220 

On either side, the least of whom could wield 

These elements, and arm him with the force 

Of all their regions ? How much more of power 

Army against army numberless to raise 

Dreadful combustion warring, and disturb, 

Though not destroy, their happy native seat ! 

Had not the Eternal King Omnipotent 

From his stronghold of Heaven high overruled 

And limited their might; though numbered such 

As each divided legion might have seemed 230 

A numerous host; in strength each armed hand 

A legion ; led in fight, yet leader seemed 

Each warrior single as in chief expert 

When to advance, or stand, or turn the sway 

Of battle, open when, and when to close 

The ridges of grim war. No thought of flight, 

None of retreat, no unbecoming deed 

That argued fear; each on himself relied, 

As only in his arm the moment lay 

Of victory. Deeds of eternal fame 240 

Were done, but infinite; for wide was spread 

That war, and various : sometimes on firm ground 

A standing fight; then, soaring on main wing, 

Tormented all the air; all air seemed then 

Conflicting fire. Long time in even scale 

The battle hung ; till Satan, who that day 

Prodigious power had shown, and met in arms 

No equal, ranging through the dire attack 

Of fighting Seraphim confused, at length 

Saw where the sword of Michael smote, and felled 250 

Squadrons at once : with huge two-handed sway 

Brandished aloft the horrid edge came down 



BOOK VI. I^I 

Wide-wasting; such destruction to withstand 

He hasted, and opposed the rocky orb 

Of tenfold adamant, his ample shield, 

A vast circumference. At his approach 

The great Archangel from his warlike toil 

Surceased, and, glad, as hoping here to end 

Intestine war in Heaven, the Arch-foe subdued 

Or captive dragged in chains, with hostile frown 260 

And visage all inflamed, first thus began : 

" * Author of evil, unknown till thy revolt, 
Unnamed in Heaven, now plenteous as thou seest 
These acts of hateful strife, hateful to all, 
Though heaviest, by just measure, on thyself 
And thy adherents : how hast thou disturbed 
Heaven's blessed peace, and into Nature brought 
Misery, uncreated till the crime 
Of thy rebellion ! how hast thou instilled 
Thy malice into thousands, once upright 270 

And faithful, now proved false ! But think not here 
To trouble holy rest;. Heaven casts thee out 
From all her confines; Heaven, the seat of bliss, 
Brooks not the works of violence and war. 
Hence, then, and evil go with thee along, 
Thy offspring, to the place of evil, Hell, 
Thou and thy wicked crew ! there mingle broils, 
Ere this avenging sword begin thy doom, 
Or some more sudden vengeance, winged from God, 
Precipitate thee with augmented pain.' 280 

" So spake the prince of Angels ; to whom thus 
The Adversary : * Nor think thou with wind 
Of airy threats to awe whom yet with deeds 
Thou canst not. Hast thou turned the least of these 
To flight or, if to fall, but that they rise 



PARADISE LOST. 

Unvanquished easier to transact with me 

That thou shouldst hope, imperious, and with threats 

To chase me hence? Err not that so shall end 

The strife which thou call'st evil, but we style 

The strife of glory; which we mean to win, 290 

Or turn this Heaven itself into the Hell 

Thou fablest; here, however, to dwell free, 

If not to reign. Meanwhile, thy utmost force 

(And join him named Almighty to thy aid) 

I fly not, but have sought thee far and nigh.' 

"They ended parle, and both addressed for fight 
Unspeakable; for who, though with the tongue 
Of Angels, can relate, or to what things 
Liken on Earth conspicuous, that may lift 
Human imagination to such highth 300 

Of godlike power? for likest gods they seemed, 
Stood they or moved, in stature, motion, arms, 
Fit to decide the empire of great Heaven. 
Now waved their fiery swords, and in the air 
Made horrid circles; two broad suns their shields 
Blazed opposite, while Expectation stood 
In horror; from each hand with speed retired, 
Where erst was thickest fight, the angelic throng, 
And left large field, unsafe within the wind 
Of such commotion : such as (to set forth 310 

Great things by small) if, Nature's concord broke, 
Among the constellations war were sprung, 
Two planets, rushing from aspect malign 
Of fiercest opposition, in mid sky 
Should combat, and their jarring spheres confound. 
Together both, with next to almighty arm 
Uplifted imminent, one stroke they aimed 
That might determine, and not need repeat, 



BOOK VI. 173 

As not of power at once; nor odds appeared 

In might or swift prevention. But the sword 320 

Of Michael from the armoury of God 

Was given him tempered so, that neither keen 

Nor solid might resist that edge : it met 

The sword of Satan, with steep force to smite 

Descending, and in half cut sheer; nor stayed, 

But, with swift wheel reverse, deep entering shared 

All his right side. Then Satan first knew pain, 

And writhed him to and fro convolved; so sore 

The griding sword with discontinuous wound 

Passed through him ; but the ethereal substance closed, 330 

Not long divisible, and from the gash 

A stream of nectarous humour issuing flowed 

Sanguine, such as celestial Spirits may bleed, 

And all his armour stained, erewhile so bright 

Forthwith on all sides to his aid was run 

By Angels many and strong, who interposed 

Defence, while others bore him on their shields 

Back to his chariot, where it stood retired 

From off the files of war; there they him laid 

Gnashing for anguish, and despite, and shame 340 

To find himself not matchless, and his pride 

Humbled by such rebuke, so far beneath 

His confidence to equal God in power. 

Yet soon he healed; for Spirits, that live throughout 

Vital in every part not, as frail Man, 

In entrails, heart or head, liver or reins 

Cannot but by annihilating die; 

Nor in their liquid texture mortal wound 

Receive, no more than can the fluid air : 

All heart they live, all head, all eye, all ear, 350 

All intellect, all sense; and as they please 



PARADISE LOST. 

They limb themselves, and colour, shape, or size 
Assume, as likes them best, condense or rare. 

" Meanwhile, in other parts, like deeds deserved 
Memorial, where the might of Gabriel fought, 
And with fierce ensigns pierced the deep array 
Of Moloch, furious king, who him defied, 
And at his chariot-wheels to drag him bound 
Threatened, nor from the Holy One of Heaven 
Refrained his tongue blasphemous; but anon, 360 

Down cloven to the waist, with shattered arms 
And uncouth pain fled bellowing. On each wing 
Uriel and Raphael his vaunting foe, 
Though huge and in a rock of diamond armed, 
Vanquished Adramelech and Asmadai, 
Two potent Thrones, that to be less than gods 
Disdained, but meaner thoughts learned in their flight, 
Mangled with ghastly wounds through plate and mail. 
Nor stood unmindful Abdiel to annoy 
The atheist crew, but with redoubled blow 370 

Ariel, and Arioch, and the violence 
Of Ramiel, scorched and blasted, overthrew. 
I might relate of thousands, and their names 
Eternize here on Earth; but those elect 
Angels, contented with their fame in Heaven, 
Seek not the praise of men : the other sort, 
In might though wondrous and in acts of war, 
Nor of renown less eager, yet by doom 
Cancelled from Heaven and sacred memory, 
Nameless in dark oblivion let them dwell; 380 

For strength from truth divided, and from just, 
Illaudable, nought merits but dispraise 
And ignominy, yet to glory aspires, 
Vain-glorious, and through infamy seeks fame : 



BOOK VI. I7 5 

Therefore eternal silence be their doom. 

"And now, their mightiest quelled, the battle swerved, 
With many an inroad gored ; deformed rout 
Entered, and foul disorder; all the ground 
With shivered armour strown, and on a heap 
Chariot and charioter lay overturned, 390 

And fiery foaming steeds; what stood recoiled, 
O'er-wearied, through the faint Satanic host, 
Defensive scarce, or with pale fear surprised, 
Then first with fear surprised and sense of pain, 
Fled ignominious, to such evil brought 
By sin of disobedience; till that hour 
Not liable to fear, or flight, or pain. 
Far otherwise the inviolable Saints 
In cubic phalanx firm advanced entire, 
Invulnerable, impenetrably armed; 400 

Such high advantages their innocence 
Gave them above their foes not to have sinned, 
Not to have disobeyed; in fight they stood 
Unwearied, unobnoxious to be pained 
By wound, though from their place by violence moved. 

"Now Night her course began, and, over Heaven 
Inducing darkness, grateful truce imposed, 
And silence on the odious din of war; 
Under her cloudy covert both retired, 
Victor and vanquished. On the foughten field 410 

Michael and his Angels prevalent 
Encamping placed in guard their watches round, 
Cherubic waving fires : on the other part, 
Satan with his rebellious disappeared, 
Far in the dark dislodged, and, void of rest, 
His potentates to council called by night, 
And in the midst thus undismayed began: 



i;6 PARADISE LOST. 

t(t O now in danger tried, now known in arms 
Not to be overpowered, companions dear, 
Found worthy not of liberty alone, 420 

Too mean pretence, but, what we more affect, 
Honour, dominion, glory, and renown; 
Who have sustained one day in doubtful fight ; 
(And if one day, why not eternal days?) 
What Heaven's Lord had powerfullest to send 
Against us from about his throne, and judged 
Sufficient to subdue us to his will, 
But proves not so : then fallible, it seems, 
Of future we may deem him, though till now 
Omniscient thought. True is, less firmly armed, 430 

Some disadvantage we endured, and pain 
Till now not known, but, known, as soon contemned; 
Since now we find this our empyreal form 
Incapable of mortal injury, 
Imperishable, and, though pierced with wound, 
Soon closing, and by native vigour healed. 
Of evil, then, so small as easy think 
The remedy : perhaps more valid arms, 
Weapons more violent, when next we meet, 
May serve to better us and worse our foes, 440 

Or equal what between us made the odds, 
In nature none : if other hidden cause 
Left them superior, while we can preserve 
Unhurt our minds, and understanding sound, 
Due search and consultation will disclose.' 

"He sat; and in the assembly next upstood 
Nisroch, of Principalities the prime; 
As one he stood escaped from cruel fight, 
Sore toiled, his riven arms to havoc hewn, 
And, cloudy in aspect, thus answering spake: 450 



BOOK VI. ^7 

" ' Deliverer from new Lords, leader to free 
Enjoyment of our right as gods ! yet hard 
For gods, and too unequal work, we find 
Against unequal arms to fight in pain, 
Against unpained, impassive ; from which evil 
Ruin must needs ensue ; for what avails 
Valour or strength, though matchless, quelled with pain, 
Which all subdues, and makes remiss the hands 
Of mightiest? Sense of pleasure we may well 
Spare out of life perhaps, and not repine, 460 

But live content, which is the calmest life; 
But pain is perfect misery, the worst 
Of evils, and, excessive, overturns 
All patience. He who, therefore, can invent 
With what more forcible we may offend 
Our yet unwounded enemies, or arm 
Ourselves with like defence, to me deserves 
No less than for deliverance what we owe.' 

" Whereto, with look composed, Satan replied : 
'Not uninvented that, which thou aright 470 

Believ'st so main to our success, I bring. 
Which of us who beholds the bright surface 
Of this ethereous mould whereon we stand 
This continent of spacious Heaven, adorned 
With plant, fruit, flower ambrosial, gems and gold 
Whose eye so superficially surveys 
These things, as not to mind from whence they grow 
Deep under ground, materials dark and crude, 
Of spiritous and fiery spume, till touched 
With Heaven's ray, and tempered, they shoot forth 480 
So beauteous, opening to the ambient light? 
These in their dark nativity the deep 
Shall yield us, pregnant with infernal flame; 

p. L. 12 



1 78 PARADISE LOST. 

Which, into hollow engines long and round 

Thick-rammed, at the other bore with touch of fire 

Dilated and infuriate, shall send forth 

From far, with thundering noise, among our foes 

Such implements of mischief as shall dash 

To pieces and o'erwhelm whatever stands 

Adverse, that they shall fear we have disarmed 490 

The Thunderer of his only dreaded bolt. 

Nor long shall be our labour; yet ere dawn 

Effect shall end our wish. Meanwhile revive; 

Abandon fear; to strength and counsel joined 

Think nothing hard, much less to be despaired.' 

" He ended ; and his words their drooping cheer 
Enlightened, and their languished hope revived. 
The invention all admired, and each how he 
To be the inventor missed ; so easy it seemed 
Once found, which yet unfound most would have thought 
Impossible. Yet, haply, of thy race, 501 

In future days, if malice should abound, 
Some one intent on mischief, or inspired 
With devilish machination, might devise 
Like instrument to plague the sons of men 
For sin, on war and mutual slaughter bent. 
Forthwith from council to the work they flew; 
None arguing stood; innumerable hands 
Were ready; in a moment up they turned 
Wide the celestial soil, and saw beneath 510 

The originals of Nature in their crude 
Conception; sulphurous and nitrous foam 
They found, they mingled, and, with subtle art 
Concocted and adusted, they reduced 
To blackest grain, and into store conveyed. 
Part hidden veins digged up (nor hath this Earth 






BOOK VI. 



19 



Entrails unlike) of mineral and stone, 

Whereof to found their engines and their balls 

Of missive ruin; part incentive reed 

Provide, pernicious with one touch to fire. 520 

So all ere day-spring, under conscious night, 

Secret they finished, and in order set, 

With silent circumspection, unespied. 

"Now when fair Morn orient in Heaven appeared, 
Up rose the victor Angels, and to arms 
The matin trumpet sung: in arms they stood 
Of golden panoply, refulgent host, 
Soon banded; others from the dawning hills 
Looked round, and scouts each coast light-armed scour, 
Each quarter, to descry the distant foe, 530 

Where lodged, or whither fled, or if for fight, 
In motion or in halt. Him soon they met 
Under spread ensigns moving nigh, in slow 
But firm battalion ; back with speediest sail, 
Zophiel, of Cherubim the swiftest wing, 
Came flying, and in mid air aloud thus cried : 

"'Arm, warriors, arm for fight! The foe at hand, 
Whom fled we thought, will save us long pursuit 
This day; fear not his flight; so thick a cloud 
He comes, and settled in his face I see 540 

Sad resolution and secure. Let each 
His adamantine coat gird well, and each 
Fit well his helm, gripe fast his orbed shield, 
Borne even or high; for this day will pour down, 
If I conjecture aught, no drizzling shower, 
But rattling storm of arrows barbed with fire.' 

" So warned he them, aware themselves, and soon 
In order, quit of all impediment; 
Instant, without disturb, they took alarm, 

122 



l8o PARADISE LOST. 

And onward move embattled : when, behold ! 550 

Not distant far, with heavy pace the foe 

Approaching gross and huge; in hollow cube 

Training his devilish enginry, impaled 

On every side with shadowing squadrons deep, 

To hide the fraud. At interview both stood 

A while; but suddenly at head appeared 

Satan, and thus was heard commanding loud : 

"'Vanguard, to right and left the front unfold, 
That all may see who hate us, how we seek 
Peace and composure, and with open breast 560 

Stand ready to receive them, if they like 
Our overture, and turn not back perverse; 
But that I doubt: however, witness Heaven! 
Heaven, witness thou anon ! while we discharge 
Freely our part. Ye, who appointed stand, 
Do as you have in charge, and briefly touch 
What we propound, and loud that all may hear.' 

"So scoffing in ambiguous words, he scarce 
Had ended, when to right and left the front 
Divided, and to either flank retired; 570 

Which to our eyes discovered, new and strange, 
A triple mounted row of pillars laid 
On wheels (for like to pillars most they seemed, 
Or hollowed bodies made of oak or fir, 
With branches lopt, in wood or mountain felled), 
Brass, iron, stony mould, had not their mouths 
With hideous orifice gaped on us wide, 
Portending hollow truce. At each behind 
A Seraph stood, and in his hand a reed 
Stood waving tipt with fire; while we, suspense, 580 

Collected stood within our thoughts amused; 
Not long, for sudden all, at once, their reeds 



BOOK VI. l8l 

Put forth, and to a narrow vent applied 4 

With nicest touch. Immediate in a flame, 

But soon obscured with smoke, all Heaven appeared, 

From those deep-throated engines belched, whose roar 

Embowelled with outrageous noise the air, 

And all her entrails tore, disgorging foul 

Their devilish glut, chained thunderbolts and hail 

Of iron globes; which, on the victor host 590 

Levelled, with such impetuous fury smote, 

That whom they hit none on their feet might stand, 

Though standing else as rocks, but down they fell 

By thousands, Angel on Archangel rolled, 

The sooner for their arms : unarmed, they might 

Have easily, as Spirits, evaded swift 

By quick contraction or remove; but now 

Foul dissipation followed, and forced rout; 

Nor served it to relax their serried files. 

What should they do? If on they rushed, repulse 600 

Repeated, and indecent overthrow 

Doubled, would render them yet more despised, 

And to their foes a laughter; for in view 

Stood ranked of Seraphim another row, 

In posture to displode their second tire 

Of thunder; back defeated to return 

They worse abhorred. Satan beheld their plight, 

And to his mates thus in derision called : 

"*O friends, why come not on these victors proud? 
Erewhile they fierce were coming; and when we, 610 
To entertain them fair with open front 
And breast (what could we more?), propounded terms 
Of composition, straight they changed their minds, 
Flew off, and into strange vagaries fell, 
As they would dance : yet for a dance they seemed 



1 82 PARADISE LOST. 

Somewhat extravagant and wild, perhaps 
For joy of offered peace. But I suppose, 
If our proposals once again were heard, 
We should compel them to a quick result.' 

" To whom thus Belial, in like gamesome mood : 620 
'Leader, the terms we sent were terms of weight, 
Of hard contents, and full of force urged home, 
Such as we might perceive amused them all, 
And stumbled many: who receives them right 
Had need from head to foot well understand; 
Not understood, this gift they have besides, 
They show us when our foes walk not upright.' 

"So they among themselves in pleasant vein 
Stood scoffing, highthened in their thoughts beyond 
All doubt of victory; Eternal Might 630 

To match with their inventions they presumed 
So easy, and of his thunder made a scorn, 
And all his host derided, while they stood 
A while in trouble : but they stood not long ; 
Rage prompted them at length, and found them arms 
Against such hellish mischief fit to oppose. 
Forthwith (behold the excellence, the power, 
Which God hath in his mighty Angels placed !) 
Their arms away they threw, and to the hills 
(For Earth hath this variety from Heaven 640 

Of pleasure situate in hill and dale) 
Light as the lightning-glimpse they ran, they flew; 
From their foundations loosening to and fro, 
They plucked the seated hills, with all their load, 
Rocks, waters, woods, and by the shaggy tops 
Uplifting bore them in their hands. Amaze, 
Be sure, and terror seized the rebel host, 
When coming towards them so dread they saw 



BOOK VI. 183 

The bottom of the mountains upward turned; 

Till on those cursed engines' triple row 650 

They saw them whelmed, and all their confidence 

Under the weight of mountains buried deep; 

Themselves invaded next, and on their heads 

Main promontories flung, which in the air 

Came shadowing, and oppressed whole legions armed. 

Their armour helped their harm, crushed in and bruised 

Into their substance pent, which wrought them pain 

Implacable, and many a dolorous groan, 

Long struggling underneath, ere they could wind 

Out of such prison, though Spirits of purest light, 660 

Purest at first, now gross by sinning grown. 

The rest, in imitation, to like arms 

Betook them, and the neighbouring hills uptore ; 

So hills amid the air encountered hills, 

Hurled to and fro with jaculation dire, 

That underground they fought in dismal shade; 

Infernal noise ! war seemed a civil game 

To this uproar; horrid confusion heaped 

Upon confusion rose. And now all Heaven 

Had gone to wrack, with ruin overspread, 670 

Had not the Almighty Father, where he sits 

Shrined in his sanctuary of Heaven secure, 

Consulting on the sum of things, foreseen 

This tumult, and permitted all, advised, 

That his great purpose he might so fulfil, 

To honour his anointed Son, avenged 

Upon his enemies, and to declare 

All power on him transferred : whence to his Son, 

The assessor of his throne, he thus began : 

" ' Effulgence of my glory, Son beloved, 680 

Son in whose face invisible is beheld 



184 PARADISE LOST, 

Visibly, what by Deity I am, 

And in whose hand what by decree I do, 

Second Omnipotence ! two days are passed, 

Two days, as we compute the days of Heaven, 

Since Michael and his powers went forth to tame 

These disobedient. Sore hath been their fight, 

As likeliest was when two such foes met armed ; 

For to themselves I left them; and thou know'st, 

Equal in their creation they were formed, 690 

Save what sin hath impaired which yet hath wrought 

Insensibly, for I suspend their doom : 

Whence in perpetual fight they needs must last 

Endless, and no solution will be found. 

War wearied hath performed what war can do, 

And to disordered rage let loose the reins, 

With mountains, as with weapons, armed; which makes 

Wild work in Heaven, and dangerous to the main. 

Two days are, therefore, passed, the third is thine: 

For thee I have ordained it, and thus far 700 

Have suffered, that the glory may be thine 

Of ending this great war, since none but thou 

Can end it. Into thee such virtue and grace 

Immense I have transfused, that all may know 

In Heaven and Hell thy power above compare; 

And this perverse commotion governed thus, 

To manifest thee worthiest to be Heir 

Of all things to be Heir and to be King 

By sacred unction, thy deserved right. 

Go, then, thou Mightiest, in thy Father's might; 710 

Ascend my chariot, guide the rapid wheels 

That shake Heaven's basis; bring forth all my war, 

My bow and thunder, my almighty arms 

Gird on, and sword upon thy puissant thigh ; 



BOOK VI. 185 

Pursue these Sons of Darkness, drive them out 
From all Heaven's bounds into the utter deep; 
There let them learn, as likes them, to despise 
God and Messiah his anointed King.' 

" He said, and on his Son with rays direct 
Shone full ; he all his Father full expressed 720 

Ineffably into his face received; 
And thus the Filial Godhead answering spake: 

" * O Father, O Supreme of Heavenly Thrones, 
First, Highest, Holiest, Best, thou always seek'st 
To glorify thy Son; I always thee, 
As is most just. This I my glory account, 
My exaltation, and my whole delight, 
That thou in me well pleased declar'st thy will 
Fulfilled, which to fulfil is all my bliss. 
Sceptre and power, thy giving, I assume, 730 

And gladlier shall resign, when in the end 
Thou shalt be all in all, and I in thee 
For ever, and in ^ne all whom thou lov'st : 
But whom thou hat'st I hate, and can put on 
Thy terrors, as I put thy mildness on, 
Image of thee in all things; and shall soon, 
Armed with thy might, rid Heaven of these rebelled, 
To their prepared ill mansion driven down, 
To chains of darkness and the undying worm, 
That from thy just obedience could revolt, 740 

Whom to obey is happiness entire. 
Then shall thy Saints, unmixed, and from the impure 
Far separate, circling thy holy mount, 
Unfeigned halleluiahs to thee sing, 
Hymns of high praise, and I among them chief.' 

"So said, he, o'er his sceptre bowing, rose 
From the right hand of Glory where he sat; 



1 86 PARADISE LOST. 

And the third sacred morn began to shine, 

Dawning through Heaven. Forth rushed with whirlwind 

sound 

The chariot of Paternal Deity, 750 

Flashing thick flames, wheel within wheel, undrawn, 
Itself instinct with spirit, but convoyed 
By four Cherubic shapes. Four faces each 
Had wondrous ; as with stars, their bodies all 
And wings were set with eyes; with eyes the wheels 
Of beryl, and careering fires between; 
Over their heads a crystal firmament, 
Whereon a sapphire throne, inlaid with pure 
Amber and colours of the showery arch. 
He, in celestial panoply all armed 760 

Of radiant Urim, work divinely wrought, 
Ascended; at his right hand Victory 
Sat eagle-winged; beside him hung his bow 
And quiver with three-bolted thunder stored; 
And from about him fierce effusion rolled 
Of smoke, and bickering flame, and sparkles dire. 
Attended with ten thousand thousand Saints, 
He onward came ; far off his coming shone ; 
And twenty thousand (I their number heard) 
Chariots of God, half on each hand, were seen. 770 

He on the wings of Cherub rode sublime 
On the crystalline sky, in sapphire throned, 
Illustrious far and wide, but by his own 
First seen ; them unexpected joy surprised 
When the great ensign of Messiah blazed 
Aloft by Angels borne, his sign in Heaven; 
Under whose conduct Michael soon reduced 
His army, circumfused on either wing, 
Under their Head embodied all in one. 



BOOK VI. 187 

Before him Power Divine his way prepared; 780 

At his command the uprooted hills retired 

Each to his place; they heard his voice, and went 

Obsequious; Heaven his wonted face renewed, 

And with fresh flowerets hill and valley smiled. 

"This saw his hapless foes, but stood obdured, 
And to rebellious fight rallied their powers, 
Insensate, hope conceiving from despair. 
In Heavenly Spirits could such perverseness dwell? 
But to convince the proud what signs avail, 
Or wonders move the obdurate to relent? 790 

They, hardened more by what might most reclaim, 
Grieving to see his glory, at the sight 
Took envy, and, aspiring to his highth, 
Stood re-embattled fierce, by force or fraud 
Weening to prosper, and at length prevail 
Against God and Messiah, or to fall 
In universal ruin last; and now 
To final battle drew, disdaining flight, 
Or faint retreat : when the great Son of God 
To all his host on either hand thus spake : 800 

"' Stand still in bright array, ye Saints; here stand, 
Ye Angels armed; this day from battle rest. 
Faithful hath been your warfare, and of God 
Accepted, fearless in his righteous cause; 
And as ye have received, so have ye done, 
Invincibly. But of this cursed crew 
The punishment to other hand belongs; 
Vengeance is his, or whose he sole appoints : 
Number to this day's work is not ordained, 
Nor multitude ; stand only and behold 810 

God's indignation on these godless poured 
By me; not you, but me, they have despised, 



1 88 PARADISE LOST. 

Yet envied ; against me is all their rage, 

Because the Father, to whom in Heaven supreme 

Kingdom and power and glory appertains, 

Hath honoured me, according to his will. 

Therefore to me their doom he hath assigned, 

That they may have their wish, to try with me 

In battle which the stronger proves they all, 

Or I alone against them; since by strength 820 

They measure all, of other excellence 

Not emulous, nor care who them excels ; 

Nor other strife with them do I vouchsafe.' 

"So spake the Son, and into terror changed * 
His countenance, too severe to be beheld, 
And full of wrath bent on his enemies. 
At once the Four spread out their starry wings 
With dreadful shade contiguous, and the orbs 
Of his fierce chariot rolled, as with the sound 
Of torrent floods, or of a numerous host. 830 

He on his impious foes right onward drove, 
Gloomy as night; under his burning wheels 
The steadfast Empyrean shook throughout, 
All but the throne itself of God. Full soon 
Among them he arrived, in his right hand 
Grasping ten thousand thunders, which he sent 
Before him, such as in their souls infixed 
Plagues; they, astonished, all resistance lost, 
All courage; down their idle weapons dropt; 
O'er shields, and helms, and helmed heads he rode 840 
Of Thrones and mighty Seraphim prostrate, 
That wished the mountains now might be again 
Thrown on them, as a shelter from his ire. 
Nor less on either side tempestuous fell 
His arrows, from the fourfold- visaged Four, 



BOOK VI. 189 

Distinct with eyes, and from the living wheels, 

Distinct alike with multitude of eyes ; 

One spirit in them ruled, and every eye 

Glared lightning, and shot forth pernicious fire 

Among the accursed, that withered all their strength, 850 

And of their wonted vigour left them drained, 

Exhausted, spiritless, afflicted, fallen. 

Yet half his strength he put not forth, but checked 

His thunder in mid-volley; for he meant 

Not to destroy, but root them out of Heaven. 

The overthrown he raised, and, as a herd 

Of goats or timorous flock together thronged, 

Drove them before him thunderstruck, pursued 

With terrors and with furies to the bounds 

And crystal wall of Heaven; which, opening wide, 860 

Rolled inward, and a spacious gap disclosed 

Into the wasteful deep. The monstrous sight 

Strook them with horror backward, but far worse 

Urged them behind ; headlong themselves they threw 

Down from the verge of Heaven; eternal wrath 

Burned after them to the bottomless pit. 

" Hell heard the unsufferable noise ; Hell saw 
Heaven ruining from Heaven, and would have fled 
Affrighted; but strict Fate had cast too deep 
Her dark foundations, and too fast had bound. 870 

Nine days they fell; confounded Chaos roared, 
And felt tenfold confusion in their fall 
Through his wild anarchy; so huge a rout 
Encumbered him with ruin. Hell at last, 
Yawning, received them whole, and on them closed; 
Hell, their fit habitation, fraught with fire 
Unquenchable, the house of woe and pain. 
Disburdened Heaven rejoiced, and soon repaired 



PARADISE LOST. 

Her mural breach, returning whence it rolled. 

Sole victor, from the expulsion of his foes 880 

Messiah his triumphal chariot turned. 

To meet him all his Saints, who silent stood 

Eye-witnesses of his almighty acts, 

With jubilee advanced; and as they went, 

Shaded with branching palm, each order bright 

Sung triumph, and him sung victorious King, 

Son, Heir, and Lord, to him dominion given, 

Worthiest to reign. He, celebrated, rode 

Triumphant through mid Heaven, into the courts 

And temple of his mighty Father throned 890 

On high; who into glory him received, 

Where now he sits at the right hand of bliss. 

" Thus, measuring things in Heaven by things on Earth, 
At thy request, and that thou may'st beware 
By what is past, to thee I have revealed 
What might have else to human race been hid ; 
The discord which befell, and war in Heaven 
Among the angelic powers, and the deep fall 
Of those too high aspiring t who rebelled 
With Satan : he who envies now thy state, 900 

Who now is plotting how he may seduce 
Thee also from obedience, that, with him 
Bereaved of'happiness, thou may'st partake 
His punishment, eternal misery; 
Which would be all his solace and revenge, 
As a despite done against the Most High, 
Thee once to gain companion of his woe. 
But listen not to his temptations ; warn 
Thy weaker; let it profit thee to have heard, 
By terrible example, the reward 910 

Of disobedience. Firm they might have stood, 
Yet fell ; remember, and fear to transgress." 



BOOK VII. 



THE ARGUMENT. 

Raphael, at the request of Adam, relates how and wherefore this 
World was first created : that God, after the expelling of Satan and his 
Angels out of Heaven, declared his pleasure to create another World, and 
other creatures to dwell therein ; sends his Son with glory, and attendance 
of Angels, to perform the work of creation in six days: the Angels 
celebrate with hymns the performance thereof, and his reascension into 
Heaven. 



BOOK VII. 



DESCEND from Heaven, Urania, by that name 
If rightly thou art called, whose voice divine 
Following, above the Olympian hill I soar, 
Above the flight of Pegasean wing! 
The meaning, not the name, I call; for thou 
Nor of the Muses nine, nor on the top 
Of old Olympus dwell'st ; but Heavenly-born, ^ 
Before the hills appeared or fountain flowed, 
Thou with eternal Wisdom didst converse, 
Wisdom thy sister, and with her didst play 10 

In presence of the Almighty Father, pleased 
With thy celestial song. Up led by thee, 
Into the Heaven of Heavens I have presumed, 
An earthly guest, and drawn empyreal air, 
Thy tempering : with like safety guided down, 
Return me to my native element; 
Lest from this flying steed unreined (as once 
Bellerophon, though from a lower clime) 
DismoTmted, on the Aleian field I fall, 
Erroneous there to wander and forlorn. 20 

Half yet remains unsung, but narrower bound 
Within the visible diurnal sphere. 

P. L. 13 



194 PARADISE LOST. 

Standing on Earth, not rapt above the pole, 

More safe I sing with mortal voice, unchanged 

To hoarse or mute, though fallen on evil days, 

On evil days though fallen, and evil tongues; 

In darkness, and with dangers compassed round, 

And solitude; yet not alone, while thou 

Visit'st my slumbers nightly, or when morn 

Purples the east. Still govern thou my song, 30 

Urania, and fit audience find, though few; 

But drive far off the barbarous dissonance 

Of Bacchus and his revellers, the race 

Of that wild rout that tore the Thracian bard 

In Rhodope, where woods and rocks had ears 

To rapture, till the savage clamour drowned 

Both harp and voice; nor could the Muse defend 

Her son. So fail not thou who thee implores; 

For thou art Heavenly, she an empty dream. 

Say, Goddess, what ensued when Raphael, 40 

The affable Archangel, had forewarned 
Adam by dire example to beware 
Apostasy, by what befell in Heaven 
To those apostates, lest the like befall 
In Paradise to Adam or his race, 
Charged not to touch the interdicted Tree, 
If they transgress, and slight that sole command, 
So easily obeyed amid the choice 
Of all tastes else to please their appetite, 
Though wandering. He with his consorted Eve 50 

The story heard attentive, and was filled 
With admiration and deep muse, to hear 
Of things so high and strange, things to their thought 
So unimaginable as hate in Heaven, 
And war so near the peace of God in bliss. 



BOOK VII. 195 

With such confusion ; but the evil, soon 

Driven back, redounded as a flood on those 

From whom it sprung, impossible to mix 

With blessedness. Whence Adam soon repealed 

The doubts that in his heart arose; and now 60 

Led on, yet sinless, with desire to know 

What nearer might concern him, how this World 

Of Heaven and Earth conspicuous first began; 

When, and whereof, created; for what cause; 

What within Eden, or without, was done 

Before his memory as one whose drouth 

Yet scarce allayed still eyes the current stream, 

Whose liquid murmur heard new thirst excites - 

Proceeded thus to ask his Heavenly guest: ^ 

" Great things, and full of wonder in our ears, 70 

Far differing from this World, thou hast revealed, 
Divine interpreter! by favour sent 
Down from the Empyrean to forewarn 
Us timely of what might else have been our loss, 
Unknown, which human knowledge could not reach; 
For which to the infinitely Good we owe 
Immortal thanks, and his admonishment 
Receive with solemn purpose to observe 
Immutably his sovran will, the end 

Of what we are. But, since thou hast vouchsafed 80 
Gently, for our instruction, to impart 
Things above earthly thought, which yet concerned 
Our knowing, as to highest Wisdom 
Deign to descend now lower, and relate 
What may no less perhaps avail us known : 
How first began this heaven which we behold 
Distant so high, with moving fires adorned 
Innumerable; and this which yields or fills 

13 



196 PARADISE LOST. 

All space, the ambient air wide interfused, 

Embracing round this florid Earth; what cause 90 

Moved the Creator, in his holy rest 

Through all eternity, so late to build 

In Chaos; and the work begun how soon 

Absolved ; if unforbid thou may'st unfold 

What we not to explore the secrets ask 

Of his eternal empire, but the more 

To magnify his works the more we know. 

And the great light of day yet wants to run 

Much of his race, though steep; suspense in heaven, 

Held by thy voice, thy potent voice, he hears, 100 

And longer will delay to hear thee tell 

His generation, and the rising birth 

Of Nature from the unapparent Deep; 

Or if the star of evening and the moon 

Haste to thy audience, Night with her will bring 

Silence, and Sleep listening to thee will watch; 

Or we can bid his absence till thy song 

End, and dismiss thee ere the morning shine." 

Thus Adam his illustrious guest besought; 
And thus the godlike Angel answered mild : 1 10 

"This also thy request, with caution asked, 
Obtain; though to recount almighty works 
What words or tongue of Seraph can suffice, 
Or heart of man suffice to comprehend? 
Yet what thou canst attain, which best may serve 
To glorify the Maker, and infer 
Thee also happier, shall not be withheld 
Thy hearing; such commission from above 
I have received, to answer thy desire 
Of knowledge within bounds ; beyond abstain 120 

To ask, nor let thine own inventions hope 



BOOK VII. 



197 



Things not revealed, which the invisible King, 

Only omniscient, hath suppressed in night, 

To none communicable in Earth or Heaven : 

Enough is left besides to search and know. 

But knowledge is as food, and needs no less 

Her temperance over appetite, to know 

In measure what the mind may well contain; 

Oppresses else with surfeit, and soon turns 

Wisdom to folly, as nourishment to wind. 130 

"Know then that after Lucifer from Heaven 
(So call him, brighter once amidst the host 
Of Angels than that star the stars among) 
Fell with his flaming legions through the Deep 
Into his place, and the great Son returned 
Victorious with his Saints, the omnipotent 
Eternal Father from his throne beheld 
Their multitude, and to his Son thus spake : 

"'At least our envious foe hath failed, who thought 
All like himself rebellious ; by whose aid 140 

This inaccessible high strength, the seat 
Of Deity supreme, us dispossessed, 
He trusted to have seized, and into fraud 
Drew many whom their place knows here no more : 
Yet far the greater part have kept, I see, 
Their station ; Heaven, yet populous, retains 
Number sufficient to possess her realms 
Though wide, and this high temple to frequent 
With ministeries due and solemn rites. 
But lest his heart exalt him in the harm 150 

Already done, to have dispeopled Heaven 
My damage fondly deemed I can repair 
That detriment, if such it be to lose 
Self-lost, and in a moment will create 



198 PARADISE LOST. 

| Another world, out of one man a race 
j| Of men innumerable, there to dwell, 
v Not here, till, by degrees of merit raised, 

They open to themselves at length the way 

Up hither, under long obedience tried, 

And Earth be changed to Heaven, and Heaven to Earth, 160 

One kingdom, joy and union without end. 

Meanwhile inhabit lax, ye Powers of Heaven; 

And thou, my Word, begotten Son, by thee 

This I perform ; speak thou, and be it done ! 

My overshadowing Spirit and might with thee 

I send along ; ride forth, and bid the Deep 

Within appointed bounds be Heaven and Earth; 

Boundless the Deep, because I am who fill 

Infinitude; nor vacuous the space, 

Though I uncircumscribed myself retire, 170 

And put not forth my goodness, which is free 

To act or not : Necessity and Chance 

Approach not me, and what I will is Fate.' 

"So spake the Almighty, and to what he spake 

His Word, the Filial Godhead, gave effect. 

Immediate are the acts of God, more swift 

Than time or motion, but to human ears 

Cannot without process of speech be told, 

So told as earthly notion can receive. 

Great triumph and rejoicing was in Heaven, 180 

When such was heard declared the Almighty's will; 

Glory they sung to the Most High, good-will 

To future men, and in their dwellings peace; 

Glory to Him whose just avenging ire 

Had driven out the ungodly from his sight 

And the habitations of the just; to Him 

Glory and praise whose wisdomJiad ordained 



BOOK VII. 199 

Good out of evil to create; instead 

Of""pirits malign, a better race to bring 
1 Into their vacant room, and thence diffuse 190 

I His good to worlds and ages infinite. 

"So sang the Hierarchies. Meanwhile the Son 

On his great expedition now appeared, 
f*Girt with omnipotence, with radiance crowned 
^Of majesty divine, sapience and love 

Immense; and all his Father in him shone. 

About his chanoT~numberless wefe poured 

Cherub and Seraph, Potentates and Thrones, 

And Virtues, winged Spirits, and chariots winged 

From the armoury of God, where stand of old 200 

Myriads, between two brazen mountains lodged 

Against a solemn day, harnessed at hand, 

Celestial equipage; and now came forth 

Spontaneous, for within them Spirit lived, 

Attendant on their Lord. Heaven opened wide 

Her ever-during gates, harmonious sound 

On golden hinges moving, to let forth 

The King of Glory, in his powerful Word 

And Spirit coming to create new worlds. 

On Heavenly ground they stood, and from the shore 210 

They viewed the vast immeasurable Abyss, 

Outrageous as a sea, dark, wasteful, wild, 

Up from the bottom turned by furious winds 

And surging waves, as mountains, to assault 

Heaven's highth, and with the centre mix the pole. 
" * Silence, ye troubled waves, and, thou Deep, peace ! ' 

Said then the omnific Word : ' your discord end ! ' 

Nor stayed; but, on the wings of Cherubim 

Uplifted, in paternal glory rode 

Far into Chaos and the World unborn; 220 



200 PARADISE LOST. 

For Chaos heard his voice. Him all his train 
Followed in bright procession, to behold 
Creation, and the wonders of his might. 
Then stayed the fervid wheels and in his hand 
He took the golden compasses, prepared 
In God's eternal store, to circumscribe 
This Universe, and all created things. 
One foot he centred, and the other turned 
Round through the vast profundity obscure, 
And said, ' Thus far extend, thus far thy bounds ; 230 
This be thy just circumference, O World ! ' 
Thus God the heaven created, thus the Earth, 
Matter unformed and void. Darkness profound 
Covered the Abyss; but on the watery calm 
His brooding wings the Spirit of God outspread, 
And vital virtue infused, and vital warmth, 
Throughout the fluid mass, but downward purged 
The black, tartareous, cold, infernal dregs, 
Adverse to life; then founded, then conglobed 
Like things to like, the rest to several place 240 

Disparted, and between spun out the air, 
And Earth, self-balanced, on her centre hung. 
" "'Let there be light!' said God; and forthwith light 
 Ethereal, first of things, quintessence pure, 

Sprung from the Deep, and from her native east 

To journey through the aery gloom began, 

Sphered in a radiant cloud, for yet the sun 

Was not; she in a cloudy tabernacle 

Sojourned the while. God saw the light was good ; 

And light from darkness by the hemisphere 250 

Divided : light the Day, and darkness Night, 

He named. Thus was the first day even and morn; 

Nor passed uncelebrated, nor unsung 



BOOK VII. 201 

By the celestial quires, when orient light 

Exhaling first from darkness they beheld, 

Birth-day of Heaven and Earth; with joy and shout 

The hollow universal orb they filled, 

And touched their golden harps, and hymning praised 

God and his works; Creator him they sung, 

Both when first evening was, and when first morn. 260 

"Again, God said, 'Let there be firmament 
Amid the waters, and let it divide 
The waters from the waters ! ' And God made 
The firmament, expanse of liquid, pure, 
Transparent, elemental air, diffused 
In circuit to the uttermost convex 
Of this great round partition firm and sure, 
The waters underneath from those above 
Dividing; for as Earth, so he the World 
Built on circumfluous waters calm, in wide 270 

Crystalline ocean, and the loud misrule 
Of Chaos far removed, lest fierce extremes 
Contiguous might distemper the whole frame : 
And heaven he named the firmament. So even 
And morning chorus sung the second day. 

"The Earth was formed, but, in the womb as yet 
Of waters, embryon, immature, involved, 
Appeared not; over all the face of Earth 
Main ocean flowed, not idle, but, with warm 
Prolific humour softening all her globe, 280 

Fermented the great mother to conceive, 
Satiate with genial moisture; when God said, 
'Be gathered now, ye waters under heaven, 
Into one place, and let dry land appear!' 
Immediately the mountains huge appear 
Emergent, and their broad bare backs upheave 



202 PARADISE LOST. 

Into the clouds ; their tops ascend the sky. 

So high as heaved the tumid hills, so low 

Down sunk a hollow bottom, broad and deep, 

Capacious bed of waters; thither they 290 

Hasted with glad precipitance, uprolled, 

As drops on dust conglobing from the dry; 

Part rise in crystal wall, or ridge direct, 

For haste; such flight the great command impressed 

On the swift floods. As armies at the call 

Of trumpet (for of armies thou hast heard) 

Troop to the standard, so the watery throng, 

Wave rolling after wave, where way they found : 

If steep, with torrent rapture, ' if through plain, 

Soft-ebbing; nor withstood them rock or hill; 300 

But they, or underground, or circuit wide 

With serpent error wandering, found their way, 

And on the washy ooze deep channels wore; 

Easy, ere God had bid the ground be dry, 

All but within those banks where rivers now 

Stream, and perpetual draw their humid train. 

The dry land Earth, and the great receptacle 

Of congregated waters he called seas; 

And saw that it was good, and said, 'Let the Earth 

Put forth the verdant grass, herb yielding seed, 310 

And fruit-tree yielding fruit after her kind, 

Whose seed is in herself upon the Earth ! ' 

He scarce had said when the bare Earth, till then 

Desert and bare, unsightly, unadorned, 

Brought forth the tender grass, whose verdure clad 

Her universal face with pleasant green ; 

Then herbs of every leaf, that sudden flowered, 

Opening their various colours, and made gay 

Her bosom, smelling sweet; and, these scarce blown, 



BOOK VII. 203 

Forth flourished thick the clustering vine, forth crept 320 
The smelling gourd, up stood the corny reed 
Embattled in her field: add the humble shrub, 
And bush with frizzled hair implicit : last 
Rose, as in dance, the stately trees, and spread 
Their branches hung with copious fruit, or gemmed 
Their blossoms. With high woods the hills were crowned, 
With tufts the valleys and each fountain-side, 
With borders long the rivers; that Earth now 
Seemed like to Heaven, a seat where gods might dwell, 
Or wander with delight, and love to haunt . 330 

Her sacred shades; though God had yet not rained 
Upon the Earth, and man to till the ground 
None was, but from the Earth a dewy mist 
Went up and watered all the ground, and each 
Plant of the field, which ere it was in the Earth 
God made, and every herb, before it grew 
On the green stem. God saw that it was good; 
So even and morn recorded the third day. 
I " Again the Almighty .spake, ' Let there be lights 
i High in the expanse of heaven, to divide 340 

The day from night; and let them be for signs, 
For seasons, and for days, and circling years; 
And let them be for lights, as I ordain 
Their office in the firmament of heaven, 
To give light on the Earth ! ' and it was so. 
And God made two great lights, great for their use 
To Man, the greater to have rule by day, 
The less by night, altern; and made the stars, 
And set them in the firmament of heaven 
To illuminate the Earth, and rule the day 350 

In their vicissitude, and rule the night, 
And light from darkness to divide. God saw, 



204 PARADISE LOST. 

Surveying his great work, that it was good : 

For, of celestial bodies, first the sun 

A mighty sphere he framed, unlightsome first, 

Though of ethereal mould; then formed the moon 

Globose, and every magnitude of stars, 

And sowed with stars the heaven thick as a field. 

Of light by far the greater part he took, 

Transplanted from her cloudy shrine, and placed 360 

In the sun's orb, made porous to receive 

And drink the liquid light, firm to retain 

Her gathered beams, great palace now of light. 

Hither, as to their fountain, other stars 

Repairing, in their golden urns draw light, 

And hence the morning planet gilds her horns; 

By tincture or reflection they augment 

Their small peculiar, though, from human sight 

So far remote, with diminution seen. 

First in his east the glorious lamp was seen, 370 

Regent of day, and all the horizon round 

Invested with bright rays, jocund to run 

His longitude through heaven's high road; the grey 

Dawn, and the Pleiades, before him danced, 

Shedding sweet influence. Less bright the moon, 

But opposite in levelled west, was set, 

His mirror, with full face borrowing her light 

From him; for other light she needed none 

In that aspect, and still that distance keeps 

Till night; then in the east her turn she shines, 380 

Revolved on heaven's great axle, and her reign 

With thousand lesser lights dividual holds, 

With thousand thousand stars, that then appeared 

Spangling the hemisphere. Then first adorned 

With her bright luminaries, that set and rose, 



BOOK VII. 205 

Glad evening and glad morn crowned the fourth day. 

" And God said, ' Let the waters generate 
Reptile with spawn abundant, living soul ; 
And let fowl fly above the Earth, with wings 
Displayed on the open firmament of heaven ! ' 390 

And God created the great whales, and each 
Soul living, each that crept, which plenteously 
The waters generated by their kinds, 
And every bird of wing after his kind; 
And saw that it was good, and blessed them, saying, 
'Be fruitful, multiply, and in the seas, 
And lakes, and running streams, the waters fill; 
And let the fowl be multiplied on the Earth ! ' 
Forthwith the sounds and seas, each creek and bay, 
With fry innumerable swarm, and shoals 400 

Of fish that with their fins and shining scales 
Glide under the green wave in sculls that oft 
Bank the mid-sea. Part, single or with mate, 
Graze the sea-weed, their pasture, and through groves 
Of coral stray, or, sporting with quick glance, 
Show to the sun their waved coats dropt with gold; 
Or, in their pearly shells at ease, attend 
Moist nutriment, or under rocks their food 
In jointed armour watch; on smooth the seal 
And bended dolphins play; part, huge of bulk, 410 

Wallowing unwieldy, enormous in their gait, 
Tempest the ocean. There leviathan, 
Hugest of living creatures, on the deep 
Stretched like a promontory, sleeps or swims, 
And seems a moving land, and at his gills 
Draws in, and at his trunk spouts out, a sea. 
Meanwhile the tepid caves, and fens, and shores, 
Their brood as numerous hatch from the egg, that soon, 



206 PARADISE LOST. 

Bursting with kindly rupture, forth disclosed 
Their callow young ; but feathered soon and fledge 420 
They summed their pens, and, soaring the air sublime, 
With clang despised the ground, under a cloud 
In prospect. There the eagle and the stork 
On cliffs and cedar-tops their eyries build. 
Part loosely wing the region ; part more wise, 
In common, ranged in figure, wedge their way, 
Intelligent of seasons, and set forth 
Their aery caravan, high over seas 
Flying, and over lands, with mutual wing 
Easing their flight; so steers the prudent crane 430 

Her annual voyage, borne on winds; the air 
Floats as they pass, fanned with unnumbered plumes. 
From branch to branch the smaller birds with song 
Solaced the woods, and spread their painted wings, 
Till even; nor then the solemn nightingale 
Ceased warbling, but all night tuned her soft lays. 
Others, on silver lakes and rivers, bathed 
Their downy breast; the swan, with arched neck 
Between her white wings mantling proudly, rows 
Her state with oary feet; yet oft they quit 440 

The dank, and, rising on stiff pennons, tower 
The mid aerial sky. Others on ground 
Walked firm : the crested cock whose clarion sounds 
The silent hours, and the other whose gay train 
Adorns him, coloured with the florid hue 
I Of rainbows and starry eyes. The waters thus 
IWith fish replenished, and the air with fowl, 
^Evening and morn solemnized the fifth day. 

"The sixth, and of Creation last, arose 
With evening harps and matin ; when God said, 450 

'Let the Earth bring forth soul living in her kind, 



BOOK VII. 207 

, Cattle, and creeping things, and beast of the Earth, 
Each in their kind ! ' The Earth obeyed, and straight, 
Opening her fertile womb, teemed at a birth 
' Innumerous living creatures, perfect forms, 
Limbed and full-grown. Out of the ground up rose, 
As from his lair, the wild beast, where he wons 
In forest wild, in thicket, brake, or den; 
Among the trees in pairs they rose, they walked; 
The cattle in the fields and meadows green : 460 

Those rare and solitary, these in flocks 
Pasturing at once, and in broad herds upsprung. 
The grassy clods now calved; now half appeared 
The tawny lion, pawing to get free 
His hinder parts, then springs, as broke from bonds. 
And rampant shakes his brinded mane; the ounce, 
The libbard, and the tiger, as the mole 
Rising, the crumbled earth above them threw 
In hillocks; the swift stag from underground 
Bore up his branching head ; scarce from his mould 470 
Behemoth, biggest born .of earth, upheaved 
His vastness; fleeced the flocks and bleating rose, 
As plants ; ambiguous between sea and land, 
The river-horse and scaly crocodile. 
At once came forth whatever creeps the ground, 
Insect or worm. Those waved their limber fans 
For wings, and smallest lineaments exact 
In all the liveries decked of summer's pride, 
With spots of gold and purple, azure and green ; 
These as a line their long dimension drew, 480 

Streaking the ground with sinuous trace : not all 
Minims of nature; some of serpent kind, 
Wondrous in length and corpulence, involved 
Their snaky folds, and added wings. First crept 



208 PARADISE LOST. 

The parsimonious emmet, provident 

Of future, in small room large heart enclosed; 

Pattern of just equality perhaps 

Hereafter, joined in her popular tribes 

Of commonalty. Swarming next appeared 

The female bee, that feeds her husband drone 490 

Deliciously, and builds her waxen cells 

With honey stored. The rest are numberless, 

And thou their natures know'st, and gav'st them names, 

Needless to thee repeated; nor unknown 

The serpent, subtlest beast of all the field, 

Of huge extent sometimes, with brazen eyes 

And hairy mane terrific, though to thee 

Not noxious, but obedient at thy call. 

"Now Heaven in all her glory shone, and rolled 
Her motions, as the great First Mover's hand 500 

First wheeled their course; Earth in her rich attire 
Consummate lovely smiled ; air, water, earth, 
By fowl, fish, beast, was flown, was swum, was walked, 
Frequent; and of the sixth day yet remained. 
There wanted yet the master-work, the end 
Of all yet done ; a creature who, not prone 
And brute as other creatures, but endued 
With sanctity of reason, might erect 
Hisstature, and upright with front serene 
Qovern the rest, selfJmowjng, and from thence 510 

Magnanimous to correspond with Heaven, 

iteful to acknowledge whence his good 
inds; thither with heart, and voice, and eyes, 
Directed in devotion, to adore 
And worship God supreme, who made him chief 
Of all his works. Therefore the omnipotent 
Eternal Father (for where is not he 



BOOK VII. 209 

Present ?) thus to his Son audibly spake : 

" ' Let us make now Man in our image, Man 

In our similitude, and let them rule 520 

jOver the fish and fowl of sea and air, 
1 Beast of the field, and over all the Earth, 

And every creeping thing that creeps the ground! 

This said, he_ formed thee, Adam, thee, O Man, 

Dust j)f the ground, and in thy nostrils breathed 

The breath of life ; in Jtus._Qwn image he 

Created thee, in the image of God 

Express, and thou becanVst a. living soul. 

Male he created thee, but thy consort 

Femalegforrace ; then blessed mankind, and said, 530 

* BefruiSuIfmultiply, and fill the Earth; 

Subdue it, and throughout dominion hold 

Over fish of the sea, and fowl of the air, 

And every living thing that moves on the Earth ! ' 

Wherever thus created (for no place 

Is yet distinct by name), thence, as thou know'st, 

He brought thee into this delicious grove, 

This garden, planted with the trees of God, 

Delectable both to behold and taste ; 

And freely all their pleasant fruit for food 540 

Gave thee : all sorts are here that all the Earth yields, 

Variety without end; but of the Tree 

Whichjasted works -knowledge of good and evil 

Thou may*striQt^ in the day__jfchou eat!t, than diest;. 

Death is fHe^penalty imposed; beware, 

And govern well thy appetite, lest. Sin 

Surprise thee, and her black attendant, Death. 
"Here finished he, and all that he had made 

Viewed, and behold ! all was entirely good. 

So even and morn accomplished the sixth day; 550 

P. L. 



2IO PARADISE LOST. 

Yet not till the Creator, from his work 
Desisting, though unwearied, up returned, 
Up to the Heaven of Heavens, his high abode, 
Thence to behold this new-created World, 
The addition of his empire how it showed 
In prospect from his throne, how good, how fair, 
Answering his great idea. Up he rode, 
Followed with acclamation and the sound 
Symphonious of ten thousand harps, that tuned 
Angelic harmonies. The Earth, the air 560 

Resounded (thou remember'st, for thou heard'st), 
jThe heavens and all the constellations rung, 
The planets in their stations listening stood, 
While the bright pomp ascended jubilant. 
* Open, ye everlasting gates ! ' they sung ; 
' Open, ye Heavens, your living doors ! let in 
The great Creator, from his work returned 
Magnificent, his six days' work, a World ! 
Open, and henceforth oft; for God will deign 
To visit oft the dwellings of just men, 570 

Delighted, and with frequent intercourse 
Thither will send his winged messengers 
On errands of supernal grace.' So sung 
The glorious train ascending. He through Heaven, 
That opened wide her blazing portals, led 
To God's eternal house direct the way; 
A broad and ample road, whose dust is gold, 
And pavement stars, as stars to thee appear 
Seen in the Galaxy, that milky way 
Which nightly as a circling zone thou seest 580 

Powdered with stars. And now on Earth the seventh 
Evening arose in Eden, for the sun 
Was set, and twilight from the east came on, 



BOOK VII. 211 

Forerunning night ; when at the holy mount 

Of Heaven's high-seated top, the imperial throne 

Of Godhead, fixed for ever firm and sure, 

The Filial Power arrived, and sat him down 

With his great Father; for he also went 

Invisible, yet stayed (such privilege 

Hath Omnipresence), and the work ordained, 590 

Author and end of all things, and, from work 

Now resting, blessed and hallowed the seventh day, 

As resting on that day from all his work; 

But not in silence holy kept : the harp 

Had work and rested not; the solemn pipe, 

And dulcimer, all organs of sweet stop, 

All sounds on fret by string or golden wire, 

Tempered soft tunings, intermixed with voice 

Choral or unison; of incense clouds, 

Fuming from golden censers, hid the mount. 600 

Creation and the six days' acts they sung : 

* Great are thy works, Jehovah! infinite 

Thy power ! what thought can measure thee, or tongue 

Relate thee? greater now in thy return 

Than from the Giant-angels : thee that day 

Thy thunders magnified ; but to create 

Is greater than created to destroy. 

Who can impair thee, mighty King, or bound 

Thy empire? Easily the proud attempt 

Of Spirits apostate and their counsels vain 610 

Thou hast repelled, while impiously they thought 

Thee to diminish, and from thee withdraw 

The number of thy worshippers. Who seeks 

To lessen thee, against his purpose serves 

To manifest the more thy might; his evil 

Thou usest, and from thence creat'st more good. 

142 



212 PARADISE LOST. 

Witness this new-made World, another Heaven 

From Heaven-gate not far, founded in view 

On the clear hyaline, the glassy sea; 

Of amplitude almost immense, with stars 620 

Numerous, and every star perhaps a world 

Of destined habitation; but thou know'st 

Their seasons; among these the seat of Men, 

Earth, with her nether ocean circumfused, 

Their pleasant dwelling-place. Thrice happy Men, 

And sons of Men! whom God hath thus advanced, 

Created in his image, there to dwell 

And worship him, and in reward to rule 

Over his works, on earth, in sea, or air, 

And multiply a race of worshippers 630 

Holy and just; thrice happy, if they know 

Their happiness, and persevere upright ! ' 

"So sung they, and the Empyrean rung 
With halleluiahs. Thus was Sabbath kept. 
And thy request think now fulfilled, that asked 
How first this World and face of things began, 
And what before thy memory was done 
From the beginning, that posterity, 
Informed by thee, might know. If else thou seek'st 
Aught, not surpassing human measure, say." 640 



BOOK VIII, 



THE ARGUMENT. 

Adam inquires concerning celestial motions ; is doubtfully answered, 
and exhorted to search rather things more worthy of knowledge. 
Adam assents, and, still desirous to detain Raphael, relates to him 
what he remembered since his own creation : his placing in Paradise ; 
his talk with God concerning solitude and fit society; his first meeting 
and nuptials with Eve. His discourse with the Angel thereupon; who, 
after admonitions repeated, departs. 






BOOK VIII. 



THE Angel ended, and in Adam's ear 
So charming left his voice that he a while 
Thought him still speaking, still stood fixed to hear; 
Then, as new-waked, thus gratefully replied : 

"What thanks sufficient, or what recompense 
Equal, have I to render thee, divine 
Historian, who thus largely hast allayed 
The thirst I had of knowledge, and vouchsafed 
This friendly condescension to relate 
Things else by me unsearchable, now heard 
With wonder, but delight, and, as is due, 
With glory attributed to the high 
Creator? Something yet of doubt remains, 
Which only thy solution can resolve. 
When I behold this goodly frame, this World 
Of Heaven and Earth consisting, and compute 
Their magnitudes; this Earth, a spot, a grain, 
An atom, with the firmament compared 
And all her numbered stars, that seem to roll 
Spaces incomprehensible (for such 20 

Their distance argues, and their swift return 
Diurnal) merely to officiate light 




2l6 PARADISE LOST. 

Round this opacous Earth, this punctual spot, 

One day and night, in all their vast survey 

Useless besides; reasoning I oft admire 

How Nature, wise and frugal, could commit 

Such disproportions, with superfluous hand 

So many nobler bodies to create, 

Greater so manifold, to this one use, 

For aught appears, and on their orbs impose 30 

Such restless revolution day by day 

Repeated, while the sedentary Earth, 

That better might with far less compass move, 

Served by more noble than herself, attains 

Her end without least motion, and receives, 

As tribute, such a sumless journey brought 

Of incorporeal speed, her warmth and light : 

Speed, to describe whose swiftness number fails." ^ 

So spake our sire, and by his countenance seemed 
Entering on studious thoughts abstruse ; which Eve 40 
Perceiving, where she sat retired in sight, 
With lowliness majestic from her seat, 
And grace that won who saw to wish her stay, 
Rose, and went forth among her fruits and flowers, 
To visit how they prospered, bud and bloom, 
Her nursery; they at her coming sprung, 
And, touched by her fair tendance, gladlier grew. 
Yet went she not as not with such discourse 
Delighted, or not capable her ear 

Of what was high : such pleasure she reserved, 50 

Adam relating, she sole auditress; 
Her husband the relater she preferred 
Before the Angel, and of him to ask 
Chose rather; he, she knew, would intermix 
Grateful digressions, and solve high dispute 



BOOK VIII. 217 

With conjugal caresses : from his lip 

Not words alone pleased her. Oh, when meet now 

Such pairs, in love and mutual honour joined? 

With goddess-like demeanour forth she went, 

Not unattended; for on her as queen 60 

A pomp of winning Graces waited still, 

And from about her shot darts of desire 

Into all eyes, to wish her still in sight. 

And Raphael now to Adam's doubt proposed 

Benevolent and facile thus replied : 

"To ask or search I blame thee not; for heaven 
Is as the Book of God before thee set, 
Wherein to read his wondrous works, and learn 
His seasons, hours, or days, or months, or years: 
This to attain, whether heaven move or Earth 70 

Imports not, if thou reckon right; the rest 
From Man or Angel the great Architect 
Did wisely to conceal, and not divulge 
His secrets, to be scanned by them who ought 
Rather admire. Or if they list to try 
Conjecture, he his fabric of the heavens 
Hath left to their disputes, perhaps to move 
His laughter at their quaint opinions wide 
Hereafter, when they come to model heaven, 
And calculate the stars; how they will wield 80 

The mighty frame; how build, unbuild, contrive, 
To save appearances; how gird the sphere 
With centric and eccentric scribbled o'er, 
Cycle and epicycle, orb in orb. 
Already by thy reasoning this I guess, 
Who art to lead thy offspring, and supposest 
That bodies bright and greater should not serve 
The less not bright, nor heaven such journeys run, 



218 PARADISE LOST. 

Earth sitting still, when she alone receives 

The benefit. Consider, first, that great 90 

Or bright infers not excellence : the Earth, 

Though, in comparison of heaven, so small, 

Nor glistering, may of solid good contain 

More plenty than the sun that barren shines, 

Whose virtue on itself works no effect, 

But in the fruitful Earth; there first received, 

His beams, unactive else, their vigour find. 

Yet not to Earth are those bright luminaries 

Officious, but to thee, Earth's habitant. 

And for the heaven's wide circuit, let it speak 100 

The Maker's high magnificence, who built 

So spacious, and his line stretched out so far, 

That Man may know he dwells not in his own ; 

An edifice too large for him to fill, 

Lodged in a small partition, and the rest 

Ordained for uses to his Lord best known. 

The swiftness of those circles attribute, 

Though numberless, to his omnipotence, 

That to corporeal substances could add 

Speed almost spiritual. Me thou think'st not slow, no 

Who since the morning-hour set out from Heaven 

Where God resides, and ere mid-day arrived 

In Eden, distance inexpressible 

By numbers that have name. But this I urge, 

Admitting motion in the heavens, to show 

Invalid that which thee to doubt it moved; 

Not that I so affirm, though so it seem 

To thee who hast thy dwelling here on Earth. 

God, to remove his ways from human sense, 

Placed heaven from Earth so far, that earthly sight, 120 

If it presume, might err in things too high, 



BOOK VIII. 219 

And no advantage gain. What if the sun 

Be centre to the World, and other stars, 

By his attractive virtue and their own 

Incited, dance about him various rounds? 

Their wandering course, now high, now low, then hid, 

Progressive, retrograde, or standing still, 

In six thou seest; and what if seventh to these 

The planet Earth, so steadfast though she seem, 

Insensibly three different motions move ? 130 

Which else to several spheres thou must ascribe, 

Moved contrary with thwart obliquities, 

Or save the sun his labour, and that swift 

Nocturnal and diurnal rhomb supposed, 

Invisible else above all stars, the wheel 

Of day and night ; which needs not thy belief, 

If Earth, industrious of herself, fetch day, 

Travelling east, and with her part averse 

From the sun's beam meet night, her other part 

Still luminous by his ray. What if that light, 140 

Sent from her through the wide transpicuous air, 

To the terrestrial moon be as a star, 

Enlightening her by day, as she by night 

This Earth reciprocal, if land be there, 

Fields and inhabitants? Her spots thou seest 

As clouds, and clouds may rain, and rain produce 

Fruits in her softened soil, for some to eat 

Allotted there; and other suns, perhaps, 

With their attendant moons, thou wilt descry, 

Communicating male and female light, 150 

Which two great sexes animate the World, 

Stored in each orb perhaps with some that live. 

For such vast room in Nature unpossessed 

By living soul, desert and desolate, 



22O PARADISE LOST. 

Only to shine, yet scarce to contribute 

Each orb a glimpse of light, conveyed so far 

Down to this habitable, which returns 

Light back to them, is obvious to dispute. 

But whether thus these things, or whether not 

Whether the sun, predominant in heaven, 160 

Rise on the Earth, or Earth rise on the sun; 

He from the east his flaming road begin, 

Or she from west her silent course advance 

With inoffensive pace that spinning sleeps 

On her soft axle, while she paces even, 

And bears thee soft with the smooth air along 

Solicit not thy thoughts with matters hid : 

Leave them to God above; him serve and fear. 

Of other creatures, as him pleases best, 

Wherever placed, let him dispose; joy thou 170 

In what he gives to thee, this Paradise 

And thy fair Eve; Heaven is for thee too high 

To know what passes there ; be lowly wise ; 

Think only what concerns thee and thy being; 

Dream not of other worlds, what creatures there 

Live, in what state, condition, or degree; 

Contented that thus far hath been revealed 

Not of Earth only, but of highest Heaven." 

To whom thus Adam, cleared of doubt, replied: - 
"How fully hast thou satisfied me, pure 180 

Intelligence of Heaven, Angel serene, 
And, freed from intricacies, taught to live 
The easiest way, nor with perplexing thoughts 
To interrupt the sweet of life, from which 
God hath bid dwell far off all anxious cares, 
And not molest us, unless we ourselves 
Seek them with wandering thoughts, and notions vain. 




BOOK VIII. 221 

But apt the mind or fancy is to rove 

Unchecked ; and of her roving is no end, 

Till warned, or by experience taught, she learn 190 

That not to know at large of things remote 

From use, obscure and subtle, but to know 

That which before us lies in daily life, 

Is the prime wisdom : what is more is fume, 

Or emptiness, or fond impertinence, 

And renders us in things that most concern 

Unpractised, unprepared, and still to seek. 

*~ Therefore from this high pitch let us descend 
A lower flight, and speak of things at hand 
Usefulj) whence haply mention may arise *~ "*" 200 
Ofsomething not unseasonable to ask, 
By sufferance, and thy wonted favour, deigned. 
Thee I have heard relating what was done 
Ere my remembrance; now hear me relate 
My story, which perhaps thou hast not heard. 
And day is yet not spent jj till L then thou seest 
How subtly to detain thee I devise, 
Inviting thee to hear while I relate 

JFond, were it not in hope of thy repf^T^ 

I For while I sit with thee, I seem in Heaven; 210 

And sweeter thy discourse is to my ear 
Than fruits of palm-tree, pleasantest to thirst 
And hunger both, from labour, at the hour 
Of sweet repast : they satiate, and soon fill, 
Though pleasant ; but thy words, with grace divine 
Imbued, bring to their sweetness no satiety."_J 

To whom thus Raphael answered, Heavenly meek: 
"Nor are thy lips ungraceful, Sire of Men, 
Nor tongue ineloquent ; for God on thee 
Abundantly his gifts hath also poured, 220 



222 PARADISE LOST. 

Inward and outward both, his image fair: 

Speaking or mute, all comeliness and grace 

Attends thee, and each word, each motion, forms. 

Nor less think we in Heaven of thee on Earth 

Than of our fellow-servant, and inquire 

Gladly into the ways of God with Man ; 

For God, we see, hath honoured thee, and set 

On Man his equal love. Say therefore on; 

For I that day was absent, as befell, 

Bound on a voyage uncouth and obscure, 230 

Far on excursion toward the gates of Hell, 

Squared in full legion (such command we had), 

To see that none thence issued forth a spy 

Or enemy, while God was in his work; 

Lest he, incensed at such eruption bold, 

Destruction with Creation might have mixed: 

Not that they durst without his leave attempt; 

But us he sends upon his high behests 

For state, as sovran King, and to inure- 

Our prompt obedience. Fast we found, fast shut, 240 

The dismal gates, and barricadoed strong; 

But, long ere our approaching, heard within 

Noise, other than the sound of dance or song; 

Torment, and loud lament, and furious rage. 

Glad we returned up to the coasts of light 

Ere Sabbath-evening; so we had in charge. 

But thy relation now; for I attend, 

Pleased with thy words no less than thou with mine," 

So spake the godlike Power, and thus our sire: 
"For Man to tell how human life began 250 

Is hard; for who himself beginning knew? 
Desire with thee still longer to converse 
Induced me. As new-waked from soundest sleep, 



BOOK VIII. 223 

Soft on the flowery herb I found me laid, 

In balmy sweat, which with his beams the sun 

Soon dried, and on the reeking moisture fed. 

Straight toward Heaven my wondering eyes I turned, 

And gazed a while the ample sky, till raised 

By quick instinctive motion up I sprung, 

As thitherward endeavouring, and upright 260 

Stood on my feet. About me round I saw 

Hill, dale, and shady woods, and sunny plains, 

And liquid lapse of murmuring streams; by these, 

Creatures that lived and moved, and walked or flew, 

Birds on the branches warbling ; all things smiled ; 

With fragrance and with joy my heart o'erflowed. 

Myself I then perused, and limb by limb 

Surveyed, and sometimes went, and sometimes ran 

With supple joints, as lively vigour led; 

But who I was, or where, or from what cause, 270 

Knew not. To speak I tried, and forthwith spake; 

My tongue obeyed, and readily could name 

Whate'er I saw. 'Thou Sun,' said I, 'fair light, 

And thou enlightened Earth, so fresh and gay, 

Ye hills and dales, ye rivers, woods, and plains, 

And ye that live and move, fair creatures, tell, 

Tell, if ye saw, how came I thus, how here 1 

Not of myself; by some great Maker then, 

In goodness and in power pre-eminent. 

Tell me, how may I know him, how adore,, u^ 280 

From whom I have that thus I move and live, 

And feel that I am happier than I know ! ' 

While thus I called, and strayed I knew not whither, 

From where I first drew air, and first beheld 

This happy light, when answer none returned, 

On a green shady bank, profuse of flowers, 



224 



PARADISE LOST. 



Pensive I sat me down; there gentle Asleep 

First found me, and with soft oppression seized 

My drowsed sense, untroubled, though I thought 

I then was passing to my former state 290 

Insensible, and forthwith to dissolve : 

When suddenly stood at my head a dream, 

Whose inward apparition gently moved 

My fancy to believe I yet had being, 

And lived. One came, methought, of shape divine, 

And said, 'Thy mansion wants thee, Adam; rise, 

First Man, of men innumerable ordained 

First father! called by thee, I come thy guide 

To the garden of bliss, thy seat prepared.' 

So saying, by the hand he took me, raised, 300 

And over fields and waters, as in air 

Smooth sliding without step, last led me up 

A woody mountain, whose high top was plain, 

A circuit wide, enclosed, with goodliest trees 

Planted, with walks and bowers, that what I saw 

Of Earth before scarce pleasant seemed. Each tree 

Loaden with fairest fruit, that hung to the eye 

Tempting, stirred in me sudden appetite 

To pluck and eat; whereat I waked, and found 

Before mine eyes all real, as the dream 310 

Had lively shadowed. Here had new begun 

My wandering, had not He, who was my guide 

Up hither, from among the trees appeared, 

Presence Divine. Rejoicing, but with awe, 

Sn adoration at his feet I fell 
iubmiss. He reared me, and, 'Whom thou sought'st I am,' 
Said mildly, ' Author of all this thou seest 
Above, or round about thee, or beneath. 
This Paradise I give thee; count it thine 



BOOK VIII. 



225 



To till and keep, and of the fruit to eat : 320 

Of every tree that in the garden grows 

P^at freely with glad heart; fear here no dearth. 

But of the Tree whose operation brings 

Knowledge of good and ill, which I have set, 

The pledge of thy obedience and thy faith, 

Amid the garden by the Tree of Life, 

Remember what I warn thee, shun to taste, 

And shun the bitter consequence : for know, 

The day thou eat'st thereof, my sole command 

Transgressed, inevitably thou shalt die, 330 

From that day mortal, and this happy state 

Shalt lose, expelled from hence into a world 

Of woe and sorrow.' Sternly he pronounced 

The rigid interdiction, which resounds 

Yet dreadful in mine ear, though in my choice 

Not to incur; but soon his clear aspect 

Returned, and gracious purpose thus renewed : 

'Not only these fair bounds, but all the Earth 

To thee and to thy race- I give; as lords 

Possess it, and all things that therein live, 340 

Or live in sea or air beast, fish, and fowl. 

In sign whereof, each bird and beast behold 

After their kinds; I bring them to receive 

From thee their names, and pay thee fealty 

With low subjection; understand the same 

Of fish within their watery residence, 

Not hither summoned, since they cannot change 

Their element to draw the thinner air.' 

As thus he spake, each bird and beast behold 

Approaching two and two; these cowering low 350 

With blandishment; each bird stooped on his wing. 

I named them as they passed, and understood 

P. L. 15 



226 PARADISE LOST. 

Their nature; with such knowledge God endued 
|" My sudden apprehension. But in these 
jn I found not what, methought, I wanted still, 

L-And to the Heavenly Vision thus presumed : 

" 'O, by what name for thou above all these, 
Above mankind, or aught than mankind higher, 
Surpassest far my naming how may I 
Adore thee, Author of this Universe, 360 

And all this good to Man, for whose well-being 
So amply, and with hands so liberal, 

Thou hast provided all things? But with me 
^rl see not who partakes. In solitude 

1 What happiness ? who can enjoy alone, 

^Or, all enjoying, what contentment find?' 
Thus I presumptuous ; and the Vision bright, 
As with a smile more brightened, thus replied : 

"'What calPst thou solitude? Is not the Earth 
With various living creatures, and the air, 370 

Replenished, and all these at thy command 
To come and play before thee? Know'st thou not 
Their language and their ways? They also know, 
And reason not contemptibly; with these 
Find pastime, and bear rule; thy realm is large.' 
So spake the universal Lord, and seemed 
So ordering. I, with leave of speech implored, 
And humble deprecation, thus replied : 

" ' Let not my words offend thee, Heavenly Power ! 
My Maker, be propitious while I speak. 380 

'Hast thou not made me here thy substitute, 

v And these inferior far beneath me set? 
Among unequals what society 
Can sort, what harmony or true delight? 
Which must be mutual, in proportion due 



BOOK VIII. 227 

Given and received; but in disparity, 
The one intense, the other still remiss, 
Cannot well suit with either, but soon prove 
Tedious alike. Of fellowship I speak, 
:Such as I seek, fit to participate 390 

All rational delight, wherein the brute 
Cannot be human consort : they rejoice 
?Each with their kind, lion with lioness ; 
'So fitly them in pairs thou hast combined; 
Much less can bird with beast, or fish with fowl, 
So well converse, nor with the ox the ape ; 
Worse then can man with beast, and least of all.' 

"Whereto the Almighty answered, not displeased: 
*A nice and subtle happiness, I see, 
Thou to thyself proposest, in the choice 400 

Of thy associates, Adam, and wilt taste 
No pleasure, though in pleasure, solitary. 
What think'st thou then of me, and this my state? 
Seem I to thee sufficiently possessed 
Of happiness, or not? who am alone 
From all eternity; for none I know 
Second to me or like, equal much less. 
How have I then with whom to hold converse, 
Save with the creatures which I made, and those 
To me inferior, infinite descents 410 

Beneath what other creatures are to thee?' 

" He ceased ; I lowly answered : * To attain 
The highth and depth of thy eternal ways 
All human thoughts come short, Supreme of things ! 
Thou in thyself art perfect, and in thee 
Is no deficience found; not so is Man, 
But in degree the cause of his desire 
By conversation with his like to help 

'52 



228 PARADISE LOST. 

Or solace his defects. No need that thou 

Should'st propagate, already infinite, 420 

And through all numbers absolute, though One; 

But Man by number is to manifest 

i His single imperfection, and beget 

| Like of his like, his image multiplied, 
In unity defective ; which requires 
Collateral love, and dearest amity. 
Thou, in thy secrecy although alone, 
Best with thyself accompanied, seek'st not 
Social communication; yet, so pleased, 
Canst raise thy creature to what highth thou wilt 430 
Of union or communion, deified; 
I, by conversing, cannot these erect 
From prone, nor in their ways complacence find 
Thus I emboldened spake, and freedom used 
Permissive, and acceptance found; which gained 
This answer from the gracious Voice Divine : 

" ' Thus far to try thee, Adam, I was pleased, 
And find thee knowing not of beasts alone, 
Which thou hast rightly named, but of thyself, 
Expressing well the spirit within thee free, 440 

My image, not imparted to the brute ; 
Whose fellowship therefore, unmeet for thee, 
Good reason was thou freely shouldst dislike; 
And be so minded still. I, ere thou spak'st, 
Knew it not good for Man to be alone, 

j And no such company as then thou saw'st 
 Intended thee for trial only brought, 

{ To see how thou couldst judge of fit and meet. 
What next I bring shall please thee, be assured, 
.JThy likeness, thy fit help, thy other self, 45 

Thy wish exactly to thy heart's desire.' 



BOOK VIII. 



229 



"He ended, or I heard no more; for now 
My earthly by his Heavenly overpowered, 
Which it had long stood under, strained to the highth 
In that celestial colloquy sublime, 
As with an object that excels the sense, 
Dazzled and spent, sunk down, and sought repair 
Of sleep, which instantly fell on me, called 
By Nature as in aid, and closed mine eyes. 
Mine eyes he closed, but open left the cell 460 

Of fancy, my internal sight ; by which, 
Abstract as in a trance, methotight I saw, 
Though sleeping, where I lay, and saw the Shape 
j Still glorious before whom awake I stood; 
Who stooping opened my left side, and took 
From thence a rib, with cordial spirits warm, 
And life-blood streaming fresh ; wide was the wound, 
But suddenly with flesh filled up and healed. 
The rib he formed and fashioned with his hands; 
Under his forming hands a creature grew, 470 

Man-like, but different sex, so lovely fair 
That what seemed fair in all the world seemed now 
Mean, or in her summed up, in her contained 
And in her looks, which from that time infused 
. Sweetness into my heart unfelt before, 
And into all things from her air inspired 
The spirit of love and amorous delight. 
She disappeared, and left me dark; I waked 
To find her, or for ever to deplore 

Her loss, and other pleasures all abjure : 480 

When, out of hope, behold her not far off, 
Such as I saw her in my dream, adorned 
With what all Earth or Heaven could bestow 
To make her amiable. On she came, 



230 PARADISE LOST. 

Led by her Heavenly Maker, though unseen, 

^And guided by his voice, nor uninformed 
, Of nuptial sanctity and marriage rites. 

Grace was in all her steps, Heaven in her eye, 

In every gesture dignity and love. 

I, overjoyed, could not forbear aloud : 490 

" ' This turn hath made amends ; thou hast fulfilled 
Thy words, Creator bounteous and benign, 
Giver of all things fair, but fairest this 
Of all thy gifts ! nor enviest. I now see 
Bone of my bone, flesh of my flesh, my self 
Before me ; Woman is her name, of Man 
Extracted ; for this cause he shall forgo 
Father and mother, and to his wife adhere, 
And they shall be one flesh, one heart, one soul.' 
 "She heard me thus; and, though divinely brought, ^500 
Yet innocence and virgin modesty, 
Her virtue and the conscience of her worth, 
That would be wooed, and not unsought be won, 
Not obvious, not obtrusive, but retired, 
The more desirable or, to say all, 
Nature herself, though pure of sinful thought 
Wrought in her so, that, seeing me, she turned; 
I followed her; she what was honour knew, 
And with obsequious majesty approved 

My pleaded reason. To the nuptial bower 510 

, li I led her blushing like the Morn ; all Heaven, 
And happy constellations, on that hour 

,.Shed their selectest influence; the Earth 
Gave sign of gratulation, and each hill; 
Joyous the birds ; fresh gales and gentle airs 
Whispered it to the woods, and from their wings 
Flung rose, flung odours from the spicy shrub, 



BOOK VIII. 231 

Disporting, till the amorous bird of night 

Sung spousal, and bid haste the evening star 

On his hill-top to light the bridal lamp. 520 

"Thus have I told thee all my state, and brought 
My story to the sum of earthly bliss 
Which I enjoy, and must confess to find 
In all things else delight indeed, but such 
As, used or not, works in the mind no change, 
Nor vehement desire these delicacies 
I mean of taste, sight, smell, herbs, fruits, and flowers, 
Walks, and the melody of birds : but here, 
Far otherwise, transported I behold, 

Transported touch; here passion first I felt, 530 

Commotion strange, in all enjoyments else 
Superior and unmoved, here only weak 
Against the charm of beauty's powerful glance. 
Or Nature failed in me, and left some part 
Not proof enough such object to sustain, 
Or, from my side subducting, took perhaps 
More than enough; at least on her bestowed 
Too much of ornament, in outward show 
Elaborate, of inward less exact. 

,, <C For well I understand in the prime end 540 

Of Nature her the inferior, in the mind 
And inward faculties, which most excel; 
In outward also her resembling less 
His image who made both, and less expressing 
The character of that dominion given 
O'er other creatures. Yet when I approach 
Her loveliness, so absolute she seems 
And in herself complete, so well to know 






Her own, that what she wills to do or say 

Seems wisest, virtuousest, discreetest, best : 550 

All higher Knowledge in her presence falls 



232 PARADISE LOST. 

Degraded; Wisdom in discourse with her 
Loses discountenanced, and like Folly shows; 
Authority and Reason on her wait, 
As one intended first, not after made 
Occasionally; and to consummate all, 
Greatness of mind and nobleness their seat 
Build in her loveliest, and create an awe 
.About her, as a guard angelic placed." 

To whom the Angel, with contracted brow : 560 

"Accuse not Nature, she hath done her part; 
Do thou but thine, and be not diffident 
Of Wisdom ; she deserts thee not, if thou 
Dismiss not her, when most thou need'st her nigh, 
By attributing overmuch to things 
Less excellent, as thou thyself perceiv'st. 
For what admir'st thou, what transports thee so? 
An outside : fair, no doubt, and worthy well 
Thy cherishing, thy honouring, and thy love; 
Not thy subjection. Weigh with her thyself; 570 

Then value. Oft-times nothing profits more 
Than self-esteem, grounded on just and right, 
Well managed; of that skill the more thou know'st, 
The more she will acknowledge thee her head, 
And to realities yield all her shows: 
Made so adorn for thy delight the more, 
jSo awful, that with honour thou may'st love 
{ -> [Thy mate, who sees when thou art seen least wise. 
"But if the sense of touch, whereby mankind 
Is propagated, seem such dear delight 580 

Beyond all other, think the same vouchsafed 
To cattle and each beast; which would not be 
To them made common and divulged, if aught 
Therein enjoyed were worthy to subdue 
The soul of Man, or passion in him move. 



BOOK VIII. 233 

[What higher in her society thou find'st 
Attractive, human, rational, love still : 
In loving thou dost well; in passion not, 
Wherein true love consists not. Love refines 
I The thoughts, and heart enlarges; hath his seat 590 

I In Reason, and is judicious ; is the scale 
| By which to Heavenly love thou may'st ascend, 
Not sunk in carnal pleasure; for which cause 
^Among the beasts no mate for thee was found." $ 

To whom thus, half abashed, Adam replied : 
"Neither her outside formed so fair, nor aught 
In procreation common to all kinds 
(Though higher of the genial bed by far, 
And with mysterious reverence, I deem), 
So much delights me as those graceful acts, 600 

Those thousand decencies, that daily flow 
From all her words and actions, mixed with love 
And sweet compliance, which declare unfeigned 
Union of mind, or in us both one soul; 
Harmony to behold in. wedded pair 
More grateful than harmonious sound to the ear. 
Yet these subject not; I to thee disclose 
What inward thence I feel, not therefore foiled, 
Who meet with various objects, from the sense 
Variously representing, yet, still free, 610 

Approve the best, and follow what I approve. 
To love thou blam'st me not; >or love, thou say'st, 
Leads up to Heaven, is both the way and guide; 
Bear with me then, if lawful what I ask. 
Love not the Heavenly Spirits, and how their love 
Express they? by looks only, or do they mix 
Irradiance, virtual or immediate touch?" ~^> 

To whom the Angel, with a smile that glowed 
Celestial rosy-red, love's proper hue, 



234 PARADISE LOST. 

Answered: "Let it suffice thee that thou know'st 620 

Js happy, and without love no happiness. 

Whatever pure thou in the body enjoy'st 

(And pure thou wert created) we enjoy 

In eminence, and obstacle find none 

Of membrane, joint, or limb, exclusive bars; 

Easier than air with air, if Spirits embrace, 

Total they mix, union of pure with pure 
' JDesiring, nor restrained conveyance need 

[As flesh to mix with flesh, or soul with soul. 

But I can now no more; the parting sun 630 

Beyond the Earth's green Cape and verdant Isles 
^esperean sets, my signal to depart. 

Be strong, live happy, and love ! but first of all 
; Him whom to love is to obey, and keep r 

clHis great command; take heed lest passion sway 

;Thy judgment to do aught which else free will 

Would not admit; thine and of all thy sons 

The weal or woe in thee is placed ; beware ! 

I in thy persevering shall rejoice, 

And all the Blest. Stand fast; to stand or fall, 640 

Free in thine own arbitrement it lies. 

Perfect within, no outward aid require; 

And all temptation to transgress repel." 
So saying, he arose ; whom Adam thus 

Followed with benediction : " Since to part, 

Go, Heavenly guest, Ethereal messenger, 

Sent from whose sovran goodness I adore! 

Gentle to me and affable hath been 

Thy condescension, and shall be honoured ever 

With grateful memory; thou to Mankind 650 

Be good and friendly still, and oft return ! " 
So parted they, the Angel up to Heaven 

From the thick shade, and Adam to his bower. 



BOOK IX. 



THE ARGUMENT. 

Satan, having compassed the Earth, with meditated guile returns as 
a mist by night into Paradise ; enters into the Serpent sleeping. Adam 
and Eve in the morning go forth to their labours, which Eve proposes 
to divide in several places, each labouring apart: Adam consents not, 
alleging the danger, lest that enemy, of whom they were forewarned, 
should attempt her found alone. Eve, loth to be thought not circum- 
spect or firm enough, urges her going apart, the rather desirous to make 
trial of her strength; Adam at last yields. The Serpent finds her alone : 
his subtle approach, first gazing, then speaking, with much flattery 
extolling Eve above all other creatures. Eve, wondering to hear the 
Serpent speak, asks how he attained to human speech and such under- 
standing, not till now ; the Serpent answers, that by tasting of a certain 
tree in the garden he attained both to speech and reason, till then void 
of both. Eve requires him to bring her to that tree, and finds it to be 
the Tree of Knowledge forbidden. The Serpent, now grown bolder, 
with many wiles and arguments induces her at length to eat ; she, 
pleased with the taste, deliberates a while whether to impart thereof to 
Adam or not; at last brings him of the fruit; relates what persuaded 
her to eat thereof. Adam, at first amazed, but perceiving her lost, 
resolves through vehemence of love to perish with her; and, extenuating 
the trespass, eats also of the fruit. The effects thereof in them both ; 
they seek to cover their nakedness ; then fall to variance and accusation 
of one another. 



BOOK IX. 



NO more of talk where God or Angel-guest 
With Man, as with his friend, familiar used 
To sit indulgent, and with him partake 
Rural repast, permitting him the while 
Venial discourse unblamed. I now must change 
Those notes to tragic; foul distrust and breach 
Disloyal on the part of man, revolt 
And disobedience; on the part of Heaven, 
Now alienated, distance and distaste, 
Anger and just rebuke, and judgment given, 10 

That brought into this World a world of woe, 
Sin and her shadow Death, and Misery, 
Death's harbinger. Sad task ! yet argument 
Not less but more heroic than the wrath 
Of stern Achilles on his foe pursued 
Thrice fugitive about Troy wall; or rage 
Of Turnus for Lavinia disespoused ; 
Or Neptune's ire, or Juno's, that so long 
Perplexed the Greek, and Cytherea's son: 
If answerable style I can obtain 20 

Of my celestial patroness, who deigns 
Her nightly visitation unimplored, 



238 PARADISE LOST. 

And dictates to me slumbering, or inspires 

Easy my unpremeditated verse, 

Since first this subject for heroic song 

Pleased me, long choosing and beginning late, 

Not sedulous by nature to indite 

Wars, hitherto the only argument 

Heroic deemed, chief mastery to dissect 

With long and tedious havoc fabled knights 30 

In battles feigned (the better fortitude 

Of patience and heroic martyrdom 

Unsung), or to describe races and games, 

Or tilting furniture, imblazoned shields, 

Impresses quaint, caparisons and steeds, 

Bases and tinsel trappings, gorgeous knights 

At joust and tournament; then marshalled feast 

Served up in hall with sewers and seneshals: 

The skill of artifice or office mean ; 

Not that which justly gives heroic name 40 

To person or to poem. Me, of these 

Nor skilled nor studious, higher argument 

Remains, sufficient of itself to raise 

That name, unless an age too late, or cold 

Climate, or years, damp my intended wing 

Depressed ; and much they may, if all be mine, 

Not hers who brings it nightly to my ear. 

The sun was sunk, and after him the star 
Of Hesperus, whose office is to bring 
Twilight upon the Earth, short arbiter 50 

'Twixt day and night, and now from end to end 
Night's hemisphere had veiled the horizon round; 
When Satan, who late fled before the threats 
Of Gabriel out of Eden, now improved 
In meditated fraud and malice, bent 



BOOK IX. 



239 



On Man's destruction, maugre what might hap 

Of heavier on himself, fearless returned. 

By night he fled, and at midnight returned 

From compassing the Earth; cautious of day, 

Since Uriel, regent of the sun, descried 60 

His entrance, and forewarned the Cherubim 

That kept their watch. Thence, full of anguish, driven, 

The space of seven continued nights he rode 

With darkness ; thrice the equinoctial line 

He circled, four times crossed the car of Night 

From pole to pole, traversing each colure; 

On the eighth returned, and on the coast averse 
From entrance or cherubic watch by stealth 
Found unsuspected way. There was a place 
(Now not, though sin, not time, first wrought the change) 70 
Where Tigris, at the foot of Paradise, 
Into a gulf shot under ground, till part 
Rose up a fountain by the Tree of Life. 
In with the river sunk, and with it rose, 
Satan, involved in rising mist; then sought 
Where to lie hid. Sea he had searched and land 
From Eden over Pontus, and the pool 
Maeotis, up beyond the river Ob ; 
Downward as far antarctic; and in length 
West from Orontes to the ocean barred 80 

At Darien, thence to the land where flows 
Ganges and Indus. Thus the orb he roamed 
With narrow search, and with inspection deep 
Considered every creature, which of all 
Most opportune might serve his wiles, and found 
The serpent subtlest beast of all the field. 
Him, after long debate, irresolute 
Of thoughts revolved, his final sentence chose 






240 PARADISE LOST. 

Fit vessel, fittest imp of fraud, in whom 

To enter, and his dark suggestions hide 90 

From sharpest sight; for in the wily snake 

Whatever sleights none would suspicious mark, 

As from his wit and native subtlety 

Proceeding, which, in other beasts observed, 

Doubt might beget of diabolic power 

Active within beyond the sense of brute. 

Thus he resolved, but first from inward grief 

His bursting passion into plaints thus poured : 

" O Earth, how like to Heaven, if not preferred 
More justly, seat worthier of Gods, as built 100 

With second thoughts, reforming what was old ! 
For what God, after better, worse would build? 
Terrestrial Heaven, danced round by other Heavens 
That shine, yet bear their bright officious lamps, 
Light above light, for thee alone, as seems, 
In thee concentring all their precious beams 
Of sacred influence ! As God in Heaven 
Is centre, yet extends to all, so thou 
Centring receiv'st from all those orbs ; in thee, 
Not in themselves, all their known virtue appears no 
Productive in herb, plant, and nobler birth 
Of creatures animate with gradual life 
Of growth, sense, reason, all summed up in Man. 
With what delight could I have walked thee round, 
If I could joy in aught, sweet interchange 
Of hill and valley, rivers, woods, and plains, 
Now land, now sea, and shores with forest crowned, 
Rocks, dens, and caves ! but I in none of these 
Find place or refuge; and the more I see 
Pleasures about me, so much more I feel 120 

Torment within me, as from the hateful siege 



BOOK IX. 



241 



Of contraries ; all good to me becomes 
Bane, and in Heaven much worse would be my state. 
But neither here seek I, no, nor in Heaven 
To dwell, unless by mastering Heaven's Supreme ; 
Nor hope to be myself less miserable 
By what I seek, but others to make such 
As I, though thereby worse to me redound : 
For only in destroying I find ease 

To my relentless thoughts; and, him destroyed, 130 

Or won to what may work his utter loss, 
For whom all this was made, all this will soon 
Follow, as to him linked in weal or woe ; 
In woe then, that destruction wide may range ! 
To me shall be the glory sole among 
The infernal Powers, in one day to have marred 
What he, Almighty styled, six nights and days 
Continued making, and who knows how long 
i Before had been contriving? though perhaps 
Not longer than since I in one night freed 140 

From servitude inglorious well nigh half 
The Angelic name, and thinner left the throng 
Of his adorers. He, to be avenged, 
And to repair his numbers thus impaired 
Whether such virtue spent of old now failed 
More Angels to create, if they at least 
Are his created, or to spite us more 
Determined to advance into our room 
A creature formed of earth, and him endow, 
Exalted from so base original, 150 

With Heavenly spoils, our spoils. What he decreed 
He effected; Man he made, and for him built 
Magnificent this World, and Earth his seat, 
Him lord pronounced, and, O indignity ! 

p. L. l6 



242 PARADISE LOST. 

Subjected to his service Angel-wings, 

And flaming ministers to watch and tend 

Their earthy charge. Of these the vigilance 

I dread, and, to elude, thus wrapt in mist 

Of midnight vapour glide obscure, and pry 

In every bush and brake, where hap may find 160 

The serpent sleeping, in whose mazy folds 

To^hide me, and the dark intent I bring. 

O foul descent ! that I, who erst contended 

With Gods to sit the highest, am now constrained 

Into a beast, and, mixed with bestial slime, 

This essence to incarnate and imbrute, 

That to the highth of deity aspired ! 

But what will not ambition and revenge 

Descend to? Who aspires must down as low 

As high he soared, obnoxious first or last 170 

To basest things. Revenge, at first though sweet, 

Bitter ere long back on itself recoils. 

Let it; I reck not, so it light well aimed 

(Since higher I fall short) on him who next 

Provokes my envy, this new favourite 

Of Heaven, this man of clay, son of despite, 

Whom, us the more to spite, his Maker raised 

From dust : spite then with spite is best repaid." 

So saying, through each thicket, dank or dry, 
Like a black mist low-creeping, he held on 180 

His midnight search, where soonest he might find 
The serpent. Him fast sleeping soon he found, 
In labyrinth of many a round self-rolled, 
His head the midst, well stored with subtle wiles: 
Not yet in horrid shade or dismal den, 
Nor nocent yet, but on the grassy herb, 
Fearless, unfeared, he slept. In at his mouth 



BOOK IX. 



243 



The Devil entered, and his brutal sense, 

In heart or head, possessing soon inspired 

With act intelligential ; but his sleep 190 

Disturbed not, waiting close the approach of morn. 

Now, whenas sacred light began to dawn 
In Eden on the humid flowers, that breathed 
Their morning incense, when all things that breathe 
From the Earth's great altar send up silent praise 
To the Creator, and his nostrils fill 
With grateful smell, forth came the human pair, 
And joined their vocal worship to the quire 
Of creatures wanting voice ; that done, partake 
The season, prime for sweetest scents and airs; 200 

Then commune how that day they best may ply 
 Their growing work; for much their work outgrew 
 The hands' dispatch of two, gardening so wide : 
* And Eve first to her husband thus began : 

"Adam, well may we labour still to dress 
This garden, still to tend plant, herb, and flower, 
Our pleasant task enjoined; but, till more hands 
Aid us, the work under our labour grows, 
Luxurious by restraint : what we by day 
Lop overgrown, or prune, or prop, or bind, 210 

One night or two with wanton growth derides, 
Tending to wild. Thou therefore now advise, 
Or hear what to my mind first thoughts present: 
Let us divide our labours thou where choice 
Leads thee, or where most needs, whether to wind 
The woodbine round this arbour, or direct 
The clasping ivy where to climb; while I, 
In yonder spring of roses intermixed 
With myrtle, find what to redress till noon. 
For, while so near each other thus all day 220 



16 2 



244 PARADISE LOST. 

Our task we choose, what wonder if so near 
Looks intervene and smiles, or object new 
Casual discourse draw on, which intermits 
Our day's work, brought to little, though begun 
Early, and the hour of supper comes unearned ! " 

To whom mild answer Adam thus returned : 
"Sole Eve, associate sole, to me beyond 
Compare above all living creatures dear ! 
Well hast thou motioned, well thy thoughts employed 
How we might best fulfil the work which here 230 

God hath assigned us, nor of me shalt pass 
i Unpraised; for nothing lovelier can be found 
In woman than to study household good, 
And good works in her husband to promote. 
Yet not so strictly hath our Lord imposed 
Labour, as to debar us when we need 
Refreshment, whether food, or talk between, 
Food of the mind, or this sweet intercourse 
Of looks and smiles ; for smiles from reason flow, 
To brute denied, and are of love the food 240 

Love, not the lowest end of human life. 
For not to irksome toil, but to delight, 
He made us, and delight to reason joined. 
These paths and bowers doubt not but our joint hands 
Will keep from wilderness with ease, as wide 
As we need walk, till younger hands ere long 
Assist us. But if much converse perhaps 
Thee satiate, to short absence I could yield; 
For solitude sometimes is best society, 
.And short retirement urges sweet return. 250 

But other doubt possesses me, lest harm 
Befall thee severed from me; for thou know'st 
What hath been warned us, what malicious foe, 



V 






BOOK IX. 245 

Envying our happiness, and of his own 
Despairing, seeks to work us woe and shame 
By sly assault; and somewhere nigh at hand 
Watches, no doubt, with greedy hope to find 
His wish and best advantage, us asunder, 
Hopeless to circumvent us joined, where each 
To other speedy aid might lend at need. 260 

Whether his first design be to withdraw 
Our fealty from God, or to disturb 
Conjugal love, than which perhaps no bliss 
Enjoyed by us excites his envy more; 
Or this, or worse, leave not the faithful side 
That gave thee being, still shades thee and protects, 
f The wife, where danger or dishonour lurks, 
* I Safest and seemliest by her husband stays, 
7 [Who guards her, or with her the worst endures." 

To whom the virgin majesty of Eve, 270 

As one who loves, and some unkindness meets, 
With sweet austere composure thus replied : 

"Offspring of Heaven and Earth, and all Earth's lord! 
That such an enemy we have, who seeks 
Our ruin, both by thee informed I learn, 
And from the parting Angel overheard, 
As in a shady nook I stood behind, 
Just then returned at shut of evening flowers. 
But that thou shouldst my firmness therefore doubt 
To God or thee, because we have a foe 280 

May tempt it, I expected not to hear. 
His violence thou fear'st not, being such 
As we, not capable of death or pain, 

I Can either not receive, or can repel. 
His fraud is then thy fear; which plain infers 
Thy equal fear that my firm faith and love 



246 PARADISE LOST. 

j Can by his fraud be shaken or seduced ; 

I Thoughts, which how found they harbour in thy breast, 

l Adam 1 misthought of her to thee so dear?" 

To whom with healing words Adam replied: 290 

" Daughter of God and Man, immortal Eve ! 
For such thou art, from sin and blame entire; 

iNot diffident of thee do I dissuade 

JThy absence from my sight, but to avoid 
|The attempt itself, intended by our foe. 

"" For he who tempts, though in vain, at least asperses 
The tempted with dishonour foul, supposed 
Not incorruptible of faith, not proof 
Against temptation. Thou thyself with scorn 
And anger wouldst resent the offered wrong, 300 

Though ineffectual found; misdeem not then, 
If such affront I labour to avert 
From thee alone, which on us both at once 
The enemy, though bold, will hardly dare, 
Or daring, first on me the assault shall light. 
Nor thou his malice and false guile contemn 
Subtle he needs must be, who could seduce 
Angels nor think superfluous others' aid. 
I from the influence of thy looks receive 
Access in every virtue; in thy sight 310 

More wise, more watchful, stronger, if need were 
Of outward strength ; while shame, thou looking on, 
Shame to be overcome or overreached, 
Would utmost vigour raise, and raised unite. 
Why shouldst not thou like sense within thee feel 
When I am present, and thy trial choose 
With me, best witness of thy virtue tried?" 
f So spake domestic Adam in his care 
And matrimonial love; but Eve, who thought 



BOOK IX. 247 

(Less attributed to her faith sincere, 320 

(Thus her reply with accent sweet renewed : 
" If this be our condition thus to dwell 

In narrow circuit straitened by a foe, 

Subtle or violent, we not endued 

Single with like defence wherever met, 
v. How are we happy, still in fear of harm ? 

Ifut harm precedes not sin : only our foe 

Tempting affronts us with his foul esteem 

Of our integrity ; his foul esteem 

Sticks no dishonour on our front, but turns 330 

Foul on himself; then wherefore shunned or feared 

By us? who rather double honour gain 

From his surmise proved false, find peace within, 

Favour from Heaven, our witness, from the event, 
t r "And what is faith, love, virtue, unassayed 
uAlone, without exterior help sustained? 

Let us not then suspect our happy state 

Left so imperfect by the^ Maker wise, 

As not secure to single or combined. 

Frail is our happiness, if this be so, 340 

And Eden were no Eden, thus exposed." 
To whom thus Adam fervently replied : 

"O Woman, best are all things as the will 

Of God ordained them ; his creating hand 

Nothing imperfect or deficient left 

Of all that he created, much less Man, 

Or aught that might his happy state secure, 

Secure from outward force: within himself 

The danger lies, yet lies within his power; 

Against his will he can receive no harm. 350 

free the will ; for what obeys 

Reason is ftce," 'and Reason 



248 PARADISE LOST. 

But bid her well be ware, and still erect, 
Lest, by some fair appearing good surprised, 
She dictate false, and misinform the will 
To do what God expressly hath forbid. 
Not then mistrust, but tender love, enjoins 
That I should mind thee oft, and mind thou me. 
Firm we subsist, yet possible to swerve, 
Since Reason not impossibly may meet 360 

Some specious object by the foe suborned, 
And fall into deception unaware, 
f Not keeping strictest watch, as she was warned. 
 Seek not temptation then, which to avoid 
i Were better, and most likely if from me 
Thou sever not : trial will come unsought. 
Wouldst thou approve thy constancy, approve 
First thy obedience ; the other who can know, 
Not seeing thee attempted, who attest? 
But if thou think trial unsought may find 370 

Us both securer than thus warned thou seem'st, 
Go; for thy stay, not free, absents thee more; 
Go in thy native innocence, rely 
On what thou hast of virtue, summon all; 
For God towards thee hath done his part; do thine." 

So spake the patriarch of mankind; but Eve 
Persisted; yet submiss, though last, replied: 

"With thy permission then, and thus forewarned, 
Chiefly by what thine own last reasoning words 
Touched only, that our trial, when least sought, 380 

May find us both perhaps far less prepared, 
The willinger I go, nor much expect 
A foe so proud will first the weaker seek ; 
So bent, the more shall shame him his repulse." 

Thus saying, from her husband's hand her hand 



BOOK IX. 249 

Soft she withdrew, and like a wood-nymph light, 

Dread or pryafl T nr .o. .Delia's trajn, 

Betook her to the groves, but Delia's self 

In gait surpassed and goddess-like deport, 

Though not as she with bow and quiver armed, 390 

But with such gardening tools as art, yet rude, 

Guiltless of fire, had formed, or Angels brought. 

To Pales, or Pomona, thus adorned, 

Likest she seemed Pomona when she fled 

Vertumnus or to Ceres in her prime, 

Yet virgin of Proserpina from Jove. 

[Her long with ardent look his eye pursued 

Delighted, but desiring more her stay. 
 Oft he to her his charge of quick return 

Repeated; she to him as oft engaged 400 

To be returned by noon amid the bower, 

And all things in best order to invite 

Noontide repast, or afternoon's repose. 

O much deceived, much failing, hapless Eve, 

Of thy presumed return.! event perverse ! 

Thou never from that hour in Paradise 

Found'st either sweet repast or sound repose; 

Such ambush, hid among sweet flowers and shades, 

Waited with hellish rancour imminent 

To intercept thy way, or send thee back 410 

Despoiled of innocence, of faith, of bliss. 

For now, and since first break of dawn, the Fiend, 

Mere serpent in appearance, forth was come, 
^jVnd on his quest, where likeliest he might find 
 The only two of mankind, but in them 
Vjhe whole included race, his purposed prey. 

In bower and field he sought, where any tuft 

Of grove or garden-plot more pleasant lay, 



2 SO PARADISE LOST. 

Their tendance or plantation for delight; 

By fountain or by shady rivulet 420 

He sought them both, but wished his hap might find 

Eve separate; he wished, but not with hope 

Of what so seldom chanced; when to his wish, 

Beyond his hope, Eve separate he spies, 

Veiled in a cloud of fragrance, where she stood, 

Half-spied, so thick the roses bushing round 

About her glowed, oft stooping to support 

Each flower of tender stalk, whose head, though gay 

Carnation, purple, azure, or specked with gold, 

Hung drooping unsustained : them she upstays 430 

Gently with myrtle band, mindless the while 

Herself, though fairest unsupported flower, 

From her best prop so far, and storm so nigh. 

Nearer he drew, and many a walk traversed 

Of stateliest covert, cedar, pine, or palm ; 

Then voluble and bold, now hid, now seen, 

Among thick-woven arborets, and flowers 

Imbordered on each bank, the hand of Eve: 

Spot more delicious than those gardens feigned 

Or of revived Adonis, or renowned 440 

Akinotu^ host of QMJLaeitSS' son, 

Or that, not mystic, where the sapient king 

Held dalliance with Jiis fair Egyptian spouse. 

Much he the place admired, the person more. 

As one who, long in populous city pent, 

Where houses thick and sewers annoy the air, 

Forth issuing on a summer's morn to breathe 

Among the pleasant villages and farms 

Adjoined, from each thing met conceives delight 

The smell of grain, or tedded grass, or kine, 450 

Or dairy, each rural sight, each rural sound ; 



BOOK IX. 251 

If chance with nymph-like step fair virgin pass, 

What pleasing seemed, for her now pleases more, 

She most, and in her look sums all delight : 

Such pleasure took the Serpent to behold 

This flowery plat, the sweet recess of Eve 

Thus early, thus alone. Her heavenly form 

Angelic, but more soft and feminine, 

Her graceful innocence, her every air 

Of gesture or least action, overawed 460 

His malice, and with rapine sweet bereaved 

His fierceness of the fierce intent it brought : 

That space the Evil One abstracted stood 

From his own evil, and for the time remained 

Stupidly good, of enmity disarmed, 

Of guile, of hate, of envy, of revenge. 

But the hot hell that always in him burns, 

Though in mid Heaven, soon ended his delight, 

And tortures him now more, the more he sees 

Of pleasure not for him ordained ; then soon 470 

Fierce hate he recollects, and all his thoughts 

Of mischief, gratulating, thus excites : 

" Thoughts, whither have ye led me ? with what sweet 
Compulsion thus transported to forget 
What hither brought us? hate, not love, nor hope 
Of Paradise for Hell, hope here to taste 
Of pleasure, but all pleasure to destroy, 
Save what is in destroying; other joy 
To me is lost. Then let me not let pass 
Occasion which now smiles : behold alone 480 

The woman, opportune to all attempts, 
iHer husband, for I view far round, not nigh, 
f IWhose higher intellectual more I shun, 
| (And strength, of courage haughty, and of limb 



252 PARADISE LOST. 

^Heroic built, though of terrestrial mould; 
Foe not informidable, exempt from wound, 
I not; so much hath Hell debased, and pain 
Enfeebled me, to what I was in Heaven. 
She fair, divinely fair, fit love for Gods, 
Not terrible, though terror be in love 490 

And beauty, not approached by stronger hate, 
Hate stronger under show of love well feigned 
The way which to her ruin now I tend." 

So spake the Enemy of mankind, enclosed 
In serpent, inmate bad, and toward Eve 
Addressed his way not with indented wave, 
Prone on the ground, as since, but on his rear, 
Circular base of rising folds, that towered 
Fold above fold, a surging maze; his head 
Crested aloft, and carbuncle his eyes; 500 

With burnished neck of verdant gold, erect 
Amidst his circling spires, that on the grass 
Floated redundant. Pleasing was his shape 
And lovely; never since of serpent kind 
Lovelier; not those that in Illyria changed 
Hermione and Cadmus, or the god 
In Epidaurus; nor to which transformed 
Ammonian Jove, or Capitoline, was seen, 
He with Olympias, this with her who bore 
Scipio, the highth of Rome. With tract oblique 510 

At first, as one who sought access but feared 
To interrupt, sidelong he works his way. 
As when a ship by skilful steersman wrought 
Nigh river's mouth or foreland, where the wind 
Veers oft, as oft so steers, and shifts her sail: 
So varied he, and of his tortuous train 
Curled many a wanton wreath in sight of Eve, 



1 



BOOK IX. 253 

To lure her eye; she, busied, heard the sound 

Of rustling leaves, but minded not, as used 

To such disport before her through the field, 520 

From every beast, more duteous at her call, 

Than at Circean call the herd disguised. 

He, bolder ncnv, uncalled before her stood, 

But as in gaze admiring. Oft he bowed 

His turret crest, and sleek enamelled neck, 

Fawning, and licked the ground whereon she trod. 

His gentle dumb expression turned at length 

The eye of Eve to mark his play; he, glad 

Of her attention gained, with serpent-tongue 

Organic, or impulse of vocal air, 530 

His fraudulent temptation thus began : 

If" Wonder not, sovran mistress, if perhaps 

Thou canst who art sole wonder; much less arm 

Thy looks, the heaven of mildness, with disdain, 

Displeased that I approach thee thus, and gaze 

Insatiate, I thus single, nor have feared 

Thy awful brow, more awful thus retired. 

Fairest resemblance of thy Maker fair, 

Thee all things living gaze on, all things thine 

By gift, and thy celestial beauty adore, 540 

With ravishment beheld there best beheld 

Where universally admired; but here 

In this enclosure wild, these beasts among, 

Beholders rude, and shallow to discern 

Half what in thee is fair, one man except, 

Who sees thee ? (and what is one ?) who shouldst be seen 

A Goddess among Gods, adored and served 

By Angels numberless, thy daily train." 

So glozed the Tempter, and his proem tuned; 
Into the heart of Eve his words made way, 550 



254 PARADISE LOST. 

Though at the voice much marvelling; at length, 
Not unamazed, she thus in answer spake : 

"What may this mean? Language of Man pronounced 
By tongue of brute, and human sense expressed ! 
The first at least of these I thought denied 
To beasts, whom God on their creation- day 
Created mute to all articulate sound; 
The latter I demur, for in their looks 
Much reason, and in their actions, oft appears, 
Thee, Serpent, subtlest beast of all the field 560 

I knew, but not with human voice endued ; 
Redouble then this miracle, and say, 
How cam'st thou speakable of mute, and how 
To me so friendly grown above the rest 
Of brutal kind, that daily are in sight : 
Say, for such wonder claims attention due." 

To whom the guileful Tempter thus replied: 
"Empress of this fair World, resplendent Eve! 
Easy to me it is to tell thee all 
What thou command'st, and right thou shouldst be 

obey'd. 570 

I was at first as other beasts that graze 
The trodden herb, of abject thoughts and low, 
As was my food, nor aught but food discerned 
Or sex, and apprehended nothing high : 
Till on a day, roving the field, I chanced 
A goodly tree far distant to behold, 
Loaden with fruit of fairest colours mixed, 
Ruddy and gold. I nearer drew to gaze; 
When from the boughs a savoury odour blown, 
Grateful to appetite, more pleased my sense 580 

Than smell of sweetest fennel, or the teats 
Of ewe or goat dropping with milk at even, 



BOOK IX. 255 

Unsucked of lamb or kid, that tend their play. 

To satisfy the sharp desire I had 

Of tasting those fair apples, I resolved 

Not to defer; hunger and thirst at once, 

Powerful persuaders, quickened at the scent 

Of that alluring fruit, urged me so keen. 

About the mossy trunk I wound me soon ; 

For, high from ground,* the branches would require 590 

Thy utmost reach or Adam's : round the tree 

All other beasts that saw, with like desire 

Longing and envying stood, but could not reach. 

Amid the tree now got, where plenty hung 

Tempting so nigh, to pluck and eat my fill 

I spared not; for such pleasure till that hour 

At feed or fountain never had I found. 

f Sated at length, ere long I might perceive 

 Strange alteration in me, to degree 

Of reason in my inward powers, and speech 600 

Wanted not long, though to this shape retained. 

Thenceforth to speculations high or deep 

I turned my thoughts, and with capacious mind 

Considered all things visible in Heaven, 

Or Earth, or middle, all things fair and good: 

But all that fair and good in thy divine 

Semblance, and in thy beauty's heavenly ray, 

United I beheld; no fair to thine 

Equivalent or second, which compelled 

Me thus, though importune perhaps, to come 610 

And gaze, and worship thee of right declared 

Sovran of creatures, universal Dame ! n 

So talked the spirited sly Snake; and Eve, 
Yet more amazed, unwary thus replied: 
" Serpent, thy overpraising leaves in doubt 



256 PARADISE LOST. 

The virtue of that fruit, in thee first proved. 

But say, where grows the tree? from hence how far? 

For many are the trees of God that grow 

In Paradise, and various, yet unknown 

To us; in such abundance lies our choice, 620 

As leaves a greater store of fruit untouched, 

Still hanging incorruptible, till men 

Grow up to their provision, and more hands 

Help to disburden Nature of her birth." 

To whom the wily Adder, blithe and glad: 
"Empress, the way is ready, and not long; 
Beyond a row of myrtles, on a flat, 
Fast by a fountain, one small thicket past 
Of blowing myrrh and balm : if thou accept 
My conduct, I can bring thee thither soon." 630 

"Lead then," said Eve. He leading swiftly rolled 
In tangles, and made intricate seem straight, 
To mischief swift. Hope elevates, and joy 
Brightens his crest. As when a wandering fire, 
Compact of unctuous vapour, which the night 
Condenses, and the cold environs round, 
Kindled through agitation to a flame 
(Which oft, they say, some evil spirit attends), 
Hovering and blazing with delusive light, 
Misleads the amazed night-wanderer from his way 640 
To bogs and mires, and oft through pond or pool, 
There swallowed up and lost, from succour far: 
So glistered the dire Snake, and into fraud 

i Led Eve, our credulous mother, to the Tree 

Lpf prohibition, root of all our woe; 
Which when she saw, thus to her guide she spake: 

"Serpent, we might have spared our coming hither, 
Fruitless to me, though fruit be here to excess, 



BOOK IX. 



257 



The credit of whose virtue rest with thee ; 
Wondrous indeed, if cause of such effects ! 
But of this tree we may not taste nor touch ; 
God so commanded, and left that command 
Sole daughter of his voice : the rest, we live 
Law to ourselves ; our reasor^is our law." 

To whom the Tempter guilefully replied : 
" Indeed ? Hath God then said that of the fruit 
Of all these garden-trees ye shall not eat, 
Yet lords declared of all in Earth or air ? " 

To whom thus Eve, yet sinless : " Of the fruit 
Of each tree in the garden we may eat; 
But of the fruit of this fair tree amidst 
The garden, God hath said, *Xg 



650 



660 



._ 

Thereof, nor shall ye touch it, lest ye die.'" 
 She" scarce had "sauT," thcmgh " brief7 when now more bold 
The Tempter, but with show of zeal and love 
To Man, and indignation at his wrong, 
New part puts on, and, as to passion moved, 
Fluctuates disturbed, yet comely, and in act 
Raised, as of some great matter to begin. 
As when of old some orator renowned 670 

In Athens or free Rome, where eloquence 
Flourished, since mute, to some great cause addressed, 
Stood in himself collected, while each part, 
Motion, each act, won audience ere the tongue, 
Sometimes in highth began, as no delay 
Of preface brooking through his zeal of right : 
So standing, moving, or to highth upgrown, 
The Tempter, all impassioned, thus began : 

"O sacred, wise, and wisdom-giving Plant, 
Mother of science ! now I feel thy power 680 

Within me clear, not only to discern 



p. L. 



258 PARADISE LOST. 

Things in their causes, but to trace the ways 

Of highest agents, deemed however wise. 

Queen of this Universe ! do not believe 

Those rigid threats of death. Ye shall not die : 

How should ye? by the fruit? it^gives you life 

To knowledge ; by the threatener? look on me, 

Me who have touched and tasted, yet both live, 

And life more perfect have attained than Fate 

Meant me, by venturing higher than my lot. 690 

Shall that be shut to Man which to the beast 

Is open ? or will God incense his ire 

For such a petty trespass, and not praise 

Ijathgr, your dauntless virtue, whom the pain 

Of death denounced, whatever thing death be, 

Deterred not from achieving what might lead 

To happier Ijfe 1 knowledge of good and evilJL 

Of good, how just ! of evil if what is evil 

Bejpeal. whv not known, since easier shunned? 

God therefore cannot hurt ye, and be just ; 700 

Not just, not God ; not feared then, nor obeyed : 

Your fear itself of death removes the fear. 

Why then was this forbid? Why but to awe, 

Why but to keep ye low and ignorant, 

His worshippers? He knows that in the day 

Ye eat thereof, your eyes that seem so clear, 

Yet are but dim, shall perfectly be then 

OpenedancI cleared, and ye shall HeTas Gods t 

nowing both good and evil, as they know. 

That ye should be as Gods, since I as Man, 710 

Internal Man, is but proportion meet : 

I, of brute, human ; ye, of human, Gods. 

So ye shall die perhaps, by putting off 

Human, to put on Gods; death to be wished, 



BOOK IX. 



259 






720 



Though threatened, which no worse than this can bring !j 
And what are Gods, that Man may not become 
As they, participating godlike food? 
The Gods are first, and that advantage use 
On our belief, that all from them proceeds: 
I question it; for this fair Earth I see, 
Warmed by the sun, producing every kind, 
.Them nothing: if they all things, who enclosed 
Knowledge of good and evil in this tree, 
That whoso eats thereof forthwith attains 
Wisdom without their leave ? and wherein lies 
The offence, that Man should thus attain to know? 
What can your knowledge hurt him, or this tree 
Impart against his will, if all be his? 
Or is it envy? and can envy dwell 
In Heavenly breasts? These, these and many more 
Causes import your need of this fair fruit. 

then, and freely taste ! " * 



V 



730 



He ended, and his words, replete with guile, 
her heart too easy entrance won. 



Fixed on the fruit she gazed, which to behold 
Might tempt alone, and in her ears the sound 
Yet rung of his persuasive words, impregned " 
With reason, to her seeming, and with truth. 
Meanwhile the hour of noon drew on, and waked 
An eager appetite, raised by the smell 
So savoury of that fruit, which with desire, 
Inclinable now grown to touch or taste, 
Solicited her longing eye; yet first, 
Pausing a while, thus to herself she mused : 

" Great are thy virtues, doubtless, best of fruits, 
^Though kept from Man, and worthy to be admired, 
jWhose taste, too long forborne, at first assay 



740 



17-2 



260 PARADISE LOST. 

Gave elocution to the mute, and taught 
The tongue not made for speech to speak thy praise. 
Thy praise he also who forbids thy use 750 

Conceals not from us, naming thee the Tree 
Of Knowledge, knowledge both of good and evil; 
Forbids us then to taste; but his forbidding 
Commends thee more, while it infers the good 
By thee communicated, and our want; 
For good unknown sure is not had, or had, 
And yet unknown, is as not had at all. 
In plain then, what forbids he but to know? 
Forbids us good, forbids us to be wise ! 
Such prohibitions bind not. But if death 760 

Bind us with after-bands, what profits then 
Our inward freedom? In the day we eat 
Of this fair fruit, our doom is, we shall die ! 
How dies the Serpent? He hath eaten and lives, _^ 
And knows, and speaks, and reasons, and discerns, 
Irrational till then. For us alone 
Was death invented? or to us denied 
This intellectual food, for beasts reserved? 
For beasts it seems; yet that one beast which first 
Hath tasted envies not, but brings with joy 770 

The good befallen him, author unsuspect, 
Friendly to Man, far from deceit or guile. 
What fear I then? rather, what know to fear 
Under this ignorance of good and evil, 
Of God or death, of law or penalty? 
Here grows the cure of all, this fruit divine, 
Fair to the eye, inviting to the taste, 
Of virtue to make wise : what hinders then 
To reach, and feed at once both body and mind?" 
So saytng^TileTTash hand in evil hour 780 



BOOK IX. 26l 

Forth reaching to the fruit, she plucked, she eat. 

Earth felt the wound, and Nature from her seat, 

Sighing through all her works, gave signs of woe 

That_all was lost. Hack to the thicket slunk 

The guilty Serpent, and well might, for Eve, 

Intent now only on her taste, naught else 

Regarded; such delight till then, as seemed, 

fif Iruit she never tasted, whether true, 

Or fancied so through expectation high 

Of knowledge ; nor was Godhead from her thought. 790 

Greedily she ingorged without restraint, 

And knew not eating death. Satiate at length, 

And hightened as with wine, jocund and boon, 

Thus to herself she pleasingly began : 

"O sovran, virtuous, precious of all trees 
In Paradise ! of operation blest 
To sapience, hitherto obscured, infamed, 
And_ thy fair fruit let hang, as to no end 
Creaiecl! but henceforth my early care, 
Not without song, each -morning, and due praise, 800 
Shall tend thee, and the fertile burden ease 
Of thy full branches, offered free to all; 
Till, dieted by thee, I grow mature 
In knowledge, as the Gods who all things know; 
Though others envy what they cannot give 
For, had the gift been theirs, it had not here 
Thus grown ! Experience, next to thee I owe, 
Best guide: not* Following thee, I had remained 
In ignorance : thou open'st Wisdom's way, 
And giv'st access, though secret she retire. 810 

And I perhaps am secret; Heaven is high, 
High, aiid remote to see from thence distinct 
Each thing on Earth; and other care perhaps 



262 PARADISE LOST. 

May have diverted from continual watch 

Our great Forbidder, safe with all his spies 

About him. But to Adam in what sort 

Shall I appear? Shall I to him make known 

As yet my change, and give him to partake 

Full happiness with me, or rather not, 

But keep the odds of knowledge in my power 820 

Without copartner ? so to add what wants 

In female sex, the more to draw his love, 

And render me more equal, and perhaps, 

A thing not undesirable, sometime 

guperior ; for, inferior, who is free? 



This may be well: but what if God have seen, 

And death ensue? then I shall be no more, 

And Adam, wedded to another Eve, 

Shall live with her enjoying, I extinct ! 

A death to think ! Confirmed then I resolve, 830 

Adam shall share with me in bliss or woeT*"^ 

So dear I love him", that with him all deaths 

I could_endure, without Jiim liye_pQ Jife*" 

So saying, from the tree her step she turned, 
But first low reverence done, as to the Power 
That dwelt within, whose presence had infused 
Into the plant sciential sap, derived 
[From nectar, drink of Gods. Adam the while, 
Waiting desirous her return, had wove 
pf choicest flowers a garland, to adorn 840 

(Her tresses, and her rural labours crown, 
As 'reapers oft are wont their harvest queen. 
Great joy he promised to his thoughts, and new 
Solace in her return, so long delayed; 
Yet oft his heart, divine of something ill, 
Misgave him; he the faltering measure felt, 



BOOK IX. 



263 



And forth to meet her went, the way she took 
That morn when first they parted. By the Tree 
Of Knowledge he must pass ; there he her met, 
Scarce from the tree returning; in her hand 850 

A bough of fairest fruit, that downy smiled, 
New gathered, and ambrosial smell diffused. 
To him she hasted; in her face excuse 
Came prologue, and apology to prompt, 
Which, with bland words at will, she thus addressed : 
r "Hast thou not wondered, Adam, at my stay? 
Thee I have missed, and thought it long, deprived 
Thy presence agony of love till now 
Not felt, nor shall be twice; for nev&Ljaiore 
'. MgiD- T tr> tr y, Wh flt rash yfltried T sought. 860 

The pain of absence from thy sight. But strange 
"Hath been the cause, and wonderful to hear. 
This tree is not, as we are told, a tree 
Of danger tasted, nor to evil unknown 
Opening the way, but of divine effect 
^'o open eyes, and mak-e them GocTsT who taste ; 
And hath been tastecLsiidi. . The Serpent wise, 
Or not restrained as we, or not obeying, 
Hath eaten of the fruit, and is become, 
Not dead, as we are threatened, but thenceforth 870 

Endued with human voice and human sense, 
Reasoning to admiration, and with me 
Persuasively hath so prevailed, that I 
Have also tasted, and have also found 
The effects to correspond opener mine eyes, 
Dim erst, dilated spirits, ampler heart, 
And growing up to Godhead; which for thee 
Chiefly I sought, without thee can despise. 
VFor bliss, as thou hast part, to me is bliss; 



264 PARADISE LOST. 

Tedious, unshared with thee, and odious soon. 880 

Thou therefore also taste, that equal lot 

May join us, equal joy, as equal love; 

Lest, thou not tasting, different degree 

Disjoin us, and I then too late renounce 

Deity for thee, when fate will not permit.' 1 

~ Thus Eve with countenance blithe her story told; 

But in her cheek distemper flushing glowed. 

On the other side, Adam, soon as he heard 

The fatal trespass done by Eve, amazed, 

Astonied stood and blank, while horror chill 890 

Ran through his veins, and all his joints relaxed; 

From his slack hand the garland wreathed for Eve 

Down dropt, and all the faded roses shed. 

Speechless he stood and pale, till thus at length 

First to himself he inward silence broke : 

" O fairest of creation, last and best 
Of all God's works, creature in whom excelled 
Whatever can to sight or thought be formed, 
Holy, divine, good, amiable, or sweet ! 
How art thou lost ! how on a sudden lost, 900 

Defaced, deflowered, and now to death devote ! 
Rather, how hast thou yielded to transgress 
The strict forbiddance, how to violate 
The sacred fruit forbidden ? Some cursed fraud 
Of enemy hath beguiled thee, yet unknown, 
And me with thee hath ruined; for with thee 
Certain my resolution is to die : 
How can I live without thee? how forgo 
Thy sweet converse and love so dearly joined, 
To live again in these wild woods forlorn? 910 

Should God create another Eve, and I 
Another rib afford, yet loss of thee 






BOOK IX. 



26 S 



Would never from my heart ; no, no ! I feel 
The link of nature draw me : flesh of flesh, 
Bone of my bone thou art, and from thy state 
Mine never shall be parted, bliss_pr_woe.^_ 
so having said, as one from sad dismay 
Recomforted, and, after thoughts disturbed, 
Submitting to what seemed remediless, 
Thus in calm mood his words to Eve he turned : 920 

" Bold deed thou hast presumed, adventurous Eve, 
And peril great provoked, who thus hast dared, 
Had it Seen only coveting to eye 
That sacred fruit, sacred to abstinence; 
Much more to taste it, under ban to touch. 
But past who can recall, or done undo? 
Not God Omnipotent, nor Fate! ggt so 
Perhaps thou_shalt not die; perhaps the fart 
Is not so heinous now foretasted fruit, 
Profaned first by the Serpent, by him first 930 

Made common and unhallowed ere our taste, 
Nor yet on him found deadly; he yet lives, 
Lives, as thou saidst, and gains to live, as Man, 
Higher degree of life : inducement strong 
To us, as likely, tasting, to attain 
Proportional ascent; which cannot be 
But to be Gods, or Angels, demi-gods. 
Nor can I think that God, Creator wise, 
Though threatening, will in earnest so destroy 
Us his prime creatures, dignified so high, * 940 

Set over all his works, which in our fall, 
For us created, needs with us must fail, 
Dependent made; so God shall uncreate, 
Be frustrate, do, undo, and labour lose; 
Not well conceived of God, who, though his power 



266 PARADISE LOST. 

Creation could repeat, yet would be loth 

Us to abolish, lest the Adversary 

Triumph and say: 'Fickle their state whom God 

Most favours; who can please him long? Me first 

He ruined, now mankind; whom will he next?' 950 

Matter of scorn not to be given the Foe. 

j However, I with thee have fixed my lot, 

I Certain to undergo like doom : if death 

I Consort with thee, death is to me as life; 
So forcible within my heart I feel 
The bond of nature draw me to my own, 
My own in thee, for what thou art is mine. 
Our state cannot be severed; we are one, 
One flesh; to lose thee were to lose myself." 

So Adam, and thus Eve to him replied : 960 

" O glorious trial of exceeding love, 
Illustrious evidence, example high ! 
Engaging me to emulate; but, short 
Of thy perfection, how shall I attain, 
Adam? from whose dear side I boast me sprung, 
And gladly of our union hear thee speak, 
One heart, one soul in both ; whereof good proof 
This day affords, declaring thee resolved, 
Rather than death, or aught than death more dread, 
Shall separate us, linked in love so dear, 970 

To undgrgo wffo TT>P <">r>p 



If any be, of tasting this fair fruit ; 

Whose virtue (for of good still good proceeds, 

Direct, or by occasion) hath presented 

This happy trial of thy love, which else 

So eminently never had been known. 

Were it I thought death menaced would ensue 

This my attempt, I would sustain alone 



BOOK IX. 267 

The worst, and not persuade thee, rather die 

J2g>serted r than oblige thee with^a_fact 980 

Pernicious to thy peace, chiefly assured 

Remarkably so late of thy so true, 

So faithful love unequalled; but I feel 

Far otherwise the event not death, but life 

Augmented, opened eyes, new hopes, new joys, 

Taste so divine, that what of sweet before 

Hath touched my sense flat seems to this and harsh. 

On my experience, Adam, freely taste, 

And fear of death deliver to the winds." 

I So saying, she embraced him, and for joy 990 

nderly wept, much won that he his loyg 
id so ennobled, as of choice^ to incur 
yjne_displeasure for her sake, or death. 
In recompense (for such compliance bad 
Such recompense best merits), from the bough 
She gave him of that fair enticing fruit 
With liberal hand ; he scrupled not to eat. 
Against hi 5 hptfpr knowledge, not deceived, 
But fondly overcome with female charm. 
Earth trembled from her entrails, as again 1000 

In pangs, and Nature gave a second groan; 
Sky loured, and, muttering thunder, some sad drops 

WejTt^J; rnmplptirig nf f k p rnnrfil srn 

O-liginal_L while Adam took no thought, 

Eatingjiis fill, nor Eve to iterate 

Her former trespass feared, the more to soothe 

Him with her loved society~pthat now, 

As with new wine intoxicated both, 

They swim in mirth, and fancy that they feel 

Divinity within them breeding wings 1010 

Wherewith to scorn the Earth. But that false fruit 



268 PARADISE LOST. 

Far other operation first displayed, , 

 Carnal desire inflaming " he on Eve 
Began to cast lascivious eyes ; she him 

 As wantonly xepaid : in lust they burn, 

* Till Adam thus 'gan Eve to dalliance move: 
~*"Eve, now I see thou art exact of taste, 
And^ elegant, of sapience no small part; 
Since to each meaning savour we apply, 
And palate call judicious. I the praise 1020 

Yield thee, so well this day thou hast purveyed. 
Much pleasure we have lost, while we abstained 
From this delightful fruit, nor known till now 
True relish, tasting; if such pleasure be 
In things to us forbidden, it might be wished 
For this one tree had been forbidden ten. 
But come; so well refreshed, now let us play, 
As meet is, after such delicious fare; 
For never did thy beauty, since the day 
I saw thee first and wedded thee, adorned 1030 

With all perfections, so inflame my sense 
With ardour to enjoy thee, fairer now 
Than ever bounty of this virtuous tree ! " 

So said he, and forbore not glance or toy 
Of amorous intent, well understood 

V_ Of Eve, whose eye darted contagious fire. 
Her hand he seized, and tcTaTsKady bank, 
Thick overhead with verdant roof embowered, 
He led her, nothing loth; flowers were the couch, 
Pansies, and violets, and asphodel, 1040 

And hyacinth Earth's freshest, softest lap. 
There they their Jill of love and love's disport 
Took largely, of their mutual guilt the seal, 
The solace of their sin, till dewy"jTeep 







BOOK IX. 269 

S Oppressed them, wearied with their amorous play. 

Soon as the force oFtlTlU fallacious fruit, 
That with exhilarating vapour bland 
About their spirits had played, and inmost powers 
Made err, was now exhaled, and grosser sleep, 
Bred of unkindly fumes, with conscious dreams 1050 

Encumbered, now had left them, up they rose 
As from unrest, and, each the other viewing, 
r!Sbon found their eyesJipjar-npenecU-attd- theit -minds 
How darkened. Innocence, that as a veil 
Had shadowed them from knowing ill, was gone; 
Just confidence, and najtive_jighlojisness^ 
Vnd fi^nour, from about them, nakedjleft 

o^guilty Shame : he covered, but his robe 

ncovered more. So rose the Danite gtrong T 
Herculean Samson, from the harlot-lap 1060 

Of Phnfstean Dalijah, and wak'd 
Shorn of his strength ; they destitute and bare 
Of all their virtue. Silent, and in face 
Confounded, long they sat, as strucken mute; 
Till Adam, though not less than Eve abashed, 
At length gave utterance to these words constrained: 

" O Eve, in evil hour thou didst give ear 
To that false worm, of whomsoever taught 
To counterfeit Man's voice, true in our fall, 
False in our promised rising; since our ey_es 1070 

I Opened we find indeed r jmd find we Icnnw 
IBoth gopll and~evil, good lost and evjljyot: 
iBad fruTF'oi knowledge, it' this"Be~to know, 
Which leaves us naked thus, of honour void, 
jOf innocence, of faith, ot purity, 
pur^wonted ornaments now soiled_and stained, 
And in our faces evident the^jgns 



270 PARADISE LOST. 

^fifoul concupiscence; whence evil store, 
"Even shame, the last of evils ; of the first 
Be sure then. How shall I behold the face ioSo 

Henceforth of God or Angel, erst with joy 
And rapture so oft beheld? those Heavenly shapes 
Will dazzle now this earthly with their blaze 
Insufferably bright. Oh, might I here 
In solitude live^a^a^e^n_sorne glade 
Obscured, where highest woods, impenetrable 
To star or sunlight, spread their umbrage broad, 

I* And brown as evening ! Cover me, ye pines ! 
Ye cedars, with innumerable boughs 
Hide me, where I may never see them more ! 1090 

But let us now, as in bad plight, devise 
What best may for the present serve to hide 
The parts of each frorjx-Qtb^i: that seem most 
To shame obnoxious, and unseemliest seen ; 
Some tree,^wlio^e"l)road smooth leaves together sewed, 
And girded on our loins, may cover round 
Those middle parts, that this new comer, Shame, 
There sit not, and reproach us as unclean." 
So counselled he, and both together went 
Into the thickest wood; there soon they chose noo 

The fig-tree not that kind for fruit renowned, 
But such as at this day, to Indians known, 
In Malabar or Decan spreads her arms 
Branching so broad and long that in the ground 
The bended twigs take root, and daughters grow 
About tne mother tree, a pillared shade 
High overarched, and echoing walks between : 
There oft the Indian herdsman, shunning heat, 
Shelters in cool, and tends his pasturing herds 
At loop-holes cut through thickest shade. Those leaves 1 1 10 



BOOK IX. 



21 



They gathered, broad as Amazonian targe, 
And with what skill they had together sewed, 
f To gird their waist va.in_covering ? if to hide 
j Their guilt and dreaded_jshame ! Oh how unlike 
LTo that first naked glory! Such of late 
Columbus found the American, so girt 
With feathered cincture, naked else and wild 
Among the trees on isles and woody shores. 
Thus fenced, and, as they thought, their shame in part 
Covered, but not at rest or ease of mind, 1120 

Thej_sat them down to weep ; nor only tears 
Rained at their eyes, but high winds worse within 
Began to rise, high passions, an^er, hate, 
Mistrust, suspicion, discord, and shook sore 



rheir inward state of mind, calm region once 



And full of peace, now tost and turbulent - v 



For Understanding ruled not, and the Wi 



A 

' Heard not her lore, both in subjection now 
To sensual Appetite, who, from beneath 
Usurping over sovran ^Reason, claimed 1130 

Superior sway. From thus distempered breast 
Adam, estranged in look and altered ^tyie^. 
Speech intermitted thus to Eve renewed: 
~ "WouIbTthou hadst heartened to my words, and stayed 
With me, as I besought thee, when that strange 
Desire of wandering, this unhappy morn, 
I know not whence possessed thee ! we had then 
Remained still happy, not, as now, despoiled 
Of^ all our good, shamed, naked, miserable 1 
Let none henceforth seek needless cause to approve 1140 
The faith they owe; when earnestly they seek 
Such proof, conclude, they then begin to fail." 

To whom, soon moved with touch of blame, thus Eve: 



2-J2 PARADISE LOST. 

" What words have passed thy lips, Adam severe ! 
Imput'st thou that to my default, or will 
Of wandering, as thou call'st it, which who knows 
But might as ill have happened, thou being by, 
Or to thyself perhaps? _Hadst thou been there, 
Or here the attempt, thou couldst not have discerned 
Fraud in the Serpent, speaking as he spake; 1 1 50 

No ground of enmity between us known, 
Why he should mean me ill, or seek to harm. 
Was I to have never parted from thy side? 
As good have grown there still, a lifeless rib. 
Being as I am, whvdidst not thou, the head, 
Command me absolutely not tb~ go, 
Going into such danger, as thou saidst? 
Too facile then, thou didst not much gainsay, 
Nay, didst permit, approve, and fair dismiss. 
Hadst thou been firm and fixed in thy dissent, 1160 

Neither had I transgressed, nor thou with me." 
To whom, then first incensed, Adam replied: 
"Is this the love, is this the recompense 
Of mine to thee, ingrateful Eve, expressed 
Immutable when thou wert lost, not I, 
Who might have lived, and joyed immortal bliss, 
Yet willmgry chose- rather -death with thee ? 



And am I now upbraided as the cause 
'Of thy transgressing ? not enough severe, 
It seems, in thy restraint! What could I more? 1170 
I warned thee, I admonished jhee, foretold^ 
Thejanger^and the lurking enemy 
That lay in wait ; beyond this had been force, 

And force npnn free will hath here no plarp. 

But confidence then bore thee on, secure 
Either to meet no danger, or to find 



BOOK IX. 273 

Matter of glorious trial; and perhaps 

I also erred in overmuch admiring 

What seemed in thee s.Q.jperject t that I thought 

No evil_durst attemuLihce ; but I rue nSo 

That error now, which is becomejrny crime, 

And thou the accuser. Thus it shall befall 

Him who, to worth in women overtrusting, 

Lets her will rule: restraint she will not brook; 

And, left to herself, if evil thence ensue, 

She first his weak indulgence will accuse." 

Thus they in mutual accusation spent 
The fruitless hours, but^ neither self-condemning; 
pf their vain cpqtest app^nr^d nn gpH. 



P. L. l8 



BOOK X. 



1 8 



THE ARGUMENT. 



Man's transgression known, the guardian Angels forsake Paradise, 
and return up to Heaven to approve their vigilance, and are approved ; 
God declaring that the entrance of Satan could not be by them pre- 
vented. He sends his Son to judge the transgressors ; who descends, 
and gives sentence accordingly; then in pity clothes them both, and 
reascends. Sin and Death, sitting till then at the gates of Hell, by 
wondrous sympathy feeling the success of Satan in this new World, and 
the sin by Man there committed, resolve to sit no longer confined in 
Hell, but to follow Satan, their sire, up to the place of Man. To make 
the way easier from Hell to this World to and fro, they pave a broad 
highway or bridge over Chaos, according to the track that Satan first 
made ; then, preparing for Earth, they meet him, proud of his success, 
returning to Hell ; their mutual gratulation. Satan arrives at Pande- 
monium ; in full assembly relates, with boasting, his success against 
Man ; instead of applause is entertained with a general hiss by all his 
audience, transformed, with himself also, suddenly into serpents, ac- 
cording to his doom given in Paradise ; then, deluded with a show of 
the Forbidden Tree springing up before them, they, greedily reaching 
to take of the fruit, chew dust and bitter ashes. The proceedings of 
Sin and Death : God foretells the final victory of his Son over them, 
and the renewing of all things ; but for the present commands his 
Angels to make several alterations in the heavens and elements. Adam, 
more and more perceiving his fallen condition, heavily bewails, rejects 
the condolement of Eve; she persists, and at length appeases him: 
then, to evade the curse likely to fall on their offspring, proposes to 
Adam violent ways, which he approves not, but, conceiving better hope, 
puts her in mind of the late promise made them, that her seed should 
be revenged on the Serpent, and exhorts her, with him, to seek peace 
of the offended Deity by repentance and supplication. 



BOOK X. 



MEANWHILE the heino&s and despiteful act 
Of Satan done in Paradise, and how 
He, in the Serpent, had perverted Eve, 
Her husband she, to taste the fatal fruit, 
Was known in Heaven ; for what can scape the eye 
Of God all-seeing, or deceive his heart 
Omniscient? who, in all things wise and just, 
Hindered not Satan to attempt the mind 
Of Man, with strength entire and free will armed, 
Complete to have discovered and repulsed 10 

Whatever wiles of foe or seeming friend. 
For still they knew, and ought to have still remembered, 
The high injunction not to taste that fruit, 
Whoever tempted; which they not obeying 
Incurred (what could they less ?) the penalty, 
And, manifold in sin, deserved to fall. 

Up into Heaven from Paradise in haste 
The Angelic guards ascended, mute and sad 
For Man; for of his state by this they .knew, 
Much wondering how the subtle Fiend had stolen 20 
Entrance unseen. Soon as the unwelcome news 
From Earth arrived at Heaven-gate, displeased 



278 PARADISE LOST. 

All were who heard; dim sadness did not spare 

That time celestial visages, yet, mixed 

With pity, violated not their bliss. 

About the new-arrived, in multitudes, 

The ethereal people ran, to hear and know 

How all befell. They towards the throne supreme 

Accountable made haste to make appear 

With righteous plea their utmost vigilance, 30 

And easily approved; when the Most High 

Eternal Father, from his secret cloud ; 

Amidst, in thunder uttered thus his voice : 

"Assembled Angels, and ye Powers returned 
From unsuccessful charge, be not dismayed, 
Nor troubled at these tidings from the Earth, 
Which your sincerest care could not prevent, 
Foretold so lately what would come to pass, 
When first this Tempter crossed the gulf from Hell. 
I told ye then he should prevail and speed 40 

On his bad errand ; Man should be seduced 
And flattered out of all, believing lies 
Against his Maker; no decree of mine 
Concurring to necessitate his fall, 
Or touch with lightest moment of impulse 
His free will, to her own inclining left 
In even scale. But fallen he is; and now 
What rests, but that the mortal sentence pass 
On his transgression, death denounced that day? 
Which he presumes already vain and void, 50 

Because not yet inflicted, as he feared, 
By some immediate stroke; but soon shall find 
Forbearance no acquittance ere day end : 
Justice shall not return, as bounty, scorned. 
But whom send I to judge them ? whom but thee, 



BOOK X. 279 

Vicegerent Son? to thee I have transferred 

All judgment, whether in Heaven, or Earth, or Hell. 

Easy it may be seen that I intend 

Mercy colleague with justice, sending thee, 

Man's friend, his Mediator, his designed 60 

Both ransom and Redeemer voluntary, 

And destined Man himself to judge Man fallen." 

So spake the Father; and, unfolding bright 
Toward the right hand his glory, on the Son 
Blazed forth unclouded deity; he full 
Resplendent all his Father manifest 
Expressed, and thus divinely answered mild : 

" Father Eternal, thine is to decree, 
Mine both in Heaven and Earth to do thy will 
Supreme, that thou in me, thy Son beloved, 70 

May'st ever rest well pleased. I go to judge 
On Earth these thy transgressors; but thou know'st, 
Whoever judged, the worst on me must light, 
When time shall be; for so I undertook 
Before thee, and, not repenting, this obtain 
Of right, that I may mitigate their doom 
On me derived; yet I shall temper so 
Justice with mercy, as may illustrate most 
Them fully satisfied, and thee appease. 
Attendance none shall need, nor train, where none 80 
Are to behold the judgment but the judged, 
Those two; the third best absent is condemned, 
Convict by flight, and rebel to all law: 
Conviction to the Serpent none belongs." 

Thus saying, from his radiant seat he rose 
Of high collateral glory; Him Thrones and Powers, 
Princedoms, and Dominations ministrant 
Accompanied to Heaven-gate, from whence 



28O PARADISE LOST. 

Eden and all the coast in prospect lay. 

Down he descended straight; the speed of Gods 90 

Time counts not, though with swiftest minutes winged. 

Now was the sun in western cadence low 
From noon, and gentle airs due at their hour 
To fan the Earth now waked, and usher in 
The evening cool, when he, from wrath more cool, 
Came, the mild Judge and Intercessor both, 
To sentence Man. The voice of God they heard 
Now walking in the garden, by soft winds 
Brought to their ears, while day declined; they heard, 
And from his presence hid themselves among 100 

The thickest trees, both man and wife, till God, 
Approaching, thus to Adam called aloud: 

"Where art thou, Adam, wont with joy to meet 
My coming seen far off? I miss thee here, 
Not pleased, thus entertained with solitude, 
Where obvious duty erewhile appeared unsought. 
Or come I less conspicuous, or what change 
Absents thee, or what chance detains? Come forth." 

He came, and with him Eve, more loth, though first 
To offend, discountenanced both, and discomposed; no 
Love was not in their looks, either to God 
Or to each other, but apparent guilt, 
And shame, and perturbation, and despair, 
Anger, and obstinacy, and hate, and guile. 
Whence Adam, faltering long, thus answered brief: 

"I heard thee in the garden, and of thy voice 
Afraid, being naked, hid myself." To whom 
The gracious Judge without revile replied : 

"My voice thou oft hast heard, and hast not feared, 
But still rejoiced; how is it now become 120 

So dreadful to thee? That thou art naked, who 



BOOK X. 28l 

Hath told thee? Hast thou eaten of the tree, 

Whereof I gave thee charge thou shouldst not eat?" 
To whom thus Adam, sore beset, replied: 
"O Heaven 1 in evil strait this day I stand 

Before my Judge either to undergo 

Myself the total crime, or to accuse 

My other self, the partner of my life; 

Whose failing, while her faith to me remains, 

I should conceal, and not expose to blame 130 

By my complaint; but strict necessity 

Subdues me, and calamitous constraint, 

Lest on my head both sin and punishment, 

However insupportable, be all 

Devolved; though should I hold my peace, yet thou 

Wouldst easily detect what I conceal. 

This woman, whom thou mad'st to be my help, 

And gav'st me as thy perfect gift, so good, 

So fit, so acceptable, so divine, 

That from her hand I could suspect no ill, 140 

f And what she did, whatever in itself, 

Her doing seemed to justify the deed; 

She gave me of the tree, and I did eat." 
To whom the Sovran Presence thus replied: 
"Was she thy God, that her thou didst obey 

Before his voice? or was she made thy guide, 

Superior, or but equal, that to her 

Thou didst resign thy manhood, and the place 

Wherein God set thee above her, made of thee 

And for thee, whose perfection far excelled 150 

Hers in all real dignity? Adorned 

She was indeed, and lovely, to attract 

Thy love, not thy subjection; and her gifts 

Were such as under government well seemed, 



282 PARADISE LOST. 

Unseemly to bear rule; which was thy part 
And person, hadst thou known thyself aright." 

So having said, he thus to Eve in few : 
"Say, Woman, what is this which thou hast done?" 

To whom sad Eve, with shame nigh overwhelmed, 
Confessing soon, yet not before her Judge 160 

Bold or loquacious, thus abashed replied: 
"The Serpent me beguiled, and I did eat." 

Which when the Lord God heard, without delay 
To judgment he proceeded on the accused 
Serpent, though brute, unable to transfer 
The guilt on him who made him instrument 
Of mischief, and polluted from the end 
Of his creation; justly then accursed, 
As vitiated in nature. More to know 
Concerned not Man (since he no further knew), 170 

Nor altered his offence; yet God at last 
To Satan, first in sin, his doom applied, 
Though in mysterious terms, judged as then best; 
And on the Serpent thus his curse let fall: 

"Because thou hast done this, thou art accursed 
Above all cattle, each beast of the field; 
Upon thy belly grovelling thou shalt go, 
And dust shalt eat all the days of thy life. 
Between thee and the Woman I will put 
Enmity, and between thine and her seed; 180 

Her seed shall bruise thy head, thou bruise his heel." 

So spake this oracle, then verified 
When Jesus, son of Mary, second Eve, 
Saw Satan fall like lightning down from Heaven, 
Prince of the air; then, rising from his grave, 
Spoiled Principalities and Powers, triumphed 
In open show, and with ascension bright 



BOOK X. 283 

Captivity led captive through the air, 
The realm itself of Satan long usurped, 
Whom he shall tread at last under our feet; 190 

Even he who now foretold his fatal bruise, 
And to the Woman thus his sentence turned: 
r ' "Thy sorrow I will greatly multiply 
By thy conception ; children thou shalt bring 
In sorrow forth; and to thy husband's will 
Thine shall submit; he over thee shall rule." 

On Adam last thus judgment he pronounced: 
" Because thou hast hearkened to the voice of thy wife, 
And eaten of the tree, concerning which 
I charged thee, saying, 'Thou shalt not eat thereof,' 200 
Curs'd is the ground for thy sake; thou in sorrow 
Shalt eat thereof all the days of thy life ; 
Thorns also and thistles it shall bring thee forth 
Unbid ; and thou shalt eat the herb of the field ; 
In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread, 
Till thou return unto the ground; for thou 
Out of the ground wast taken : know thy birth, 
For dust thou art, and shalt to dust return." 

So judged he Man, both Judge and Saviour sent, 
And the instant stroke of death, denounced that day, 210 
Removed far off; then, pitying how they stood 
Before him naked to the air, that now 
Must suffer change, disdained not to begin 
Thenceforth the form of servant to assume; 
As when he washed his servants' feet, so now, 
As father of his family, he clad 
Their nakedness with skins of beasts, or slain, 
Or as the snake with youthful coat repaid; 
And thought not much to clothe his enemies. 
Nor he their outward only with the skins 220 



284 PARADISE LOST. 

Of beasts, but inward nakedness, much more 
Opprobrious, with his robe of righteousness 
Arraying, covered from his Father's sight. 
To him with swift ascent he up returned, 
Into his blissful bosom reassumed 
In glory as of old; to him appeased, 
All, though all-knowing, what had passed with Man 
Recounted, mixing intercession sweet. 
f~~ Meanwhile, ere thus was sinned and judged on Earth, 
' Within the gates of Hell sat Sin and Death, 230 

In counterview within the gates, that now 
Stood open wide, belching outrageous flame 
Far into Chaos, since the Fiend passed through, 
Sin opening ; who thus now to Death began : 
* " O Son, why sit we here each other viewing 
Idly, while Satan, our great author, thrives 
In other worlds, and happier seat provides 
For us, his offspring dear? It cannot be . 
But that success attends him ; if mishap, 
Ere this he had returned, with fury driven 240 

By his avengers, since no place like this 
Can fit his punishment, or their revenge. 
Methinks I feel new strength within me rise, 
Wings growing, and dominion given me large 
Beyond this Deep, whatever draws me on, 
Or sympathy, or some connatural force, 
Powerful at greatest distance to unite 
With secret amity things of like kind 
By secretest conveyance. Thou, my shade 
Inseparable, must with me along; 250 

For Death from Sin no power can separate. 
But, lest the difficulty of passing back 
Stay his return perhaps over this gulf 



BOOK X. 285 

Impassable, impervious, let us try 

Adventurous work, yet to thy power and mine 

Not unagreeable, to found a path 

Over this main from Hell to that new World 

Where Satan now prevails ; a monument 

Of merit high to all the infernal host, 

Easing their passage hence, for intercourse 260 

Or transmigration, as their lot shall lead. 

Nor can I miss the way, so strongly drawn 

By this new-felt attraction and instinct." 

Whom thus the meagre Shadow answered soon : 
"Go whither fate and inclination strong 
Leads thee; I shall not lag behind, nor err 
The way, thou leading ; such a scent I draw 
Of carnage, prey innumerable, and taste 
The savour of death from all things there that live. 
Nor shall I to the work thou enterprisest 270 

Be wanting, but afford thee equal aid." 

So saying, with delight he snuffed the smell 
Of mortal change on Earth. As when a flock 
Of ravenous fowl, though many a league remote, 
Against the day of battle, to a field, 
Where armies lie encamped, come flying, lured 
With scent of living carcases designed 
For death the following day in bloody fight: 
So scented the grim Feature, and upturned 
His nostril wide into the murky air, 280 

Sagacious of his quarry from so far. 
Then both, from out Hell- gates, into the waste 
Wide anarchy of Chaos damp and dark 
Flew diverse, and with power (their power was great) 
Hovering upon the waters, what they met 
Solid or slimy, as in raging sea 



286 PARADISE LOST. 

Tossed up and down, together crowded drove, 

From each side shoaling, towards the mouth of Hell ; 

As when two polar winds, blowing adverse 

Upon the Cronian sea, together drive 290 

Mountains of ice, that stop the imagined way 

Beyond Petsora eastward, to the rich 

Cathaian coast. The aggregated soil 

Death with his mace petrific, cold and dry, 

As with a trident smote, and fixed as firm 

As Delos, floating once; the rest his look 

Bound with Gorgonian rigour not to move, 

And with asphaltic slime; broad as the gate 

Deep to the roots of Hell the gathered beach 

They fastened, and the mole immense wrought on 300 

Over the foaming Deep high-arched, a bridge 

Of length prodigious, joining to the wall 

Immovable of this now fenceless World, 

Forfeit to Death; from hence a passage broad, 

Smooth, easy, inoffensive, down to Hell. 

So, if great things to small may be compared, 

Xerxes, the liberty of Greece to yoke, 

From Susa, his Memnonian palace high, 

Came to the sea, and, over Hellespont 

Bridging his way, Europe with Asia joined, 310 

And scourged with many a stroke the indignant waves. 

Now had they brought the work by wondrous art 

Pontifical, a ridge of pendent rock, 

Over the vexed Abyss, following the track 

Of Satan, to the self-same place where he 

First lighted from his wing, and landed safe 

From out of Chaos, to the outside bare 

Of this round World. With pins of adamant 

And chains they made all fast, too fast they made 



BOOK X. 287 

And durable; and now in little space 320 

The confines met of empyrean Heaven 

And of this World, and on the left hand Hell 

With long reach interposed; three several ways, 

In sight, to each of these three places led. 

And now their way to Earth they had descried, 

To Paradise first tending, when, behold 

Satan, in likeness of an Angel bright, 

Betwixt the Centaur and the Scorpion steering 

His zenith, while the sun in Aries rose ! 

Disguised he came; but those his children dear 330 

Their parent soon discerned, though in disguise. 

He, after Eve seduced, unminded slunk 

Into the wood fast by, and, changing shape 

To observe the sequel, saw his guileful act 

By Eve, though all unweeting, seconded 

Upon her husband, saw their shame that sought 

Vain covertures; bat when he saw descend 

The Son of God to judge them, terrified 

He fled, not hoping to escape, but shun 

The present, fearing guilty what his wrath 340 

Might suddenly inflict; that past, returned 

By night, and listening where the hapless pair 

Sat in their sad discourse and various plaint, 

Thence gathered his own doom; which understood 

Not instant, but of future time, with joy L -, 

And tidings fraught, to Hell he now returned,  

And at the brink of Chaos, near the foot 

Of this new wondrous pontifice, unhoped 

Met who to meet him came, his offspring dear. 

Great joy was at their meeting, and at sight 350 

Of that stupendous bridge his joy increased. 

Long he admiring stood, till Sin, his fair 



288 PARADISE LOST. 

Enchanting daughter, thus the silence broke: 

"O Parent, these are thy magnific deeds, 
Thy trophies, which thou view'st as not thine own; 
Thou art their author and prime architect; 
For I no sooner in my heart divined 
(My heart, which by a secret harmony 
Still moves with thine, joined in connexion swtct) 
That thou on Earth hadst prospered, which thy looks 360 
Now also evidence, but straight I felt, 
Though distant from thee worlds between, yet felt 
That I must after thee with this thy son; 
Such fatal consequence unites us three. 
Hell could no longer hold us in her bounds, 
Nor this unvoyageable gulf obscure 
Detain from following thy illustrious track. 
Thou hast achieved our liberty, confined 
Within Hell-gates till now; thou us empowered 
To fortify thus far, and overlay 370 

With this portentous bridge the dark Abyss. 
Thine now is all this World; thy virtue hath won 
What thy hands builded not, thy wisdom gained 
With odds what war hath lost, and fully avenged 
Our foil in Heaven : here thou shalt monarch reign, 
There didst not; there let him still victor sway, 
As battle hath adjudged, from this new World 
Retiring, by his own doom alienated, 
And henceforth monarchy with thee divide 
Of all things, parted by the empyreal bounds, 380 

His quadrature, from thy orbicular World, 
Or try thee now more dangerous to his throne." 

Whom thus the Prince of Darkness answered glad : 
| " Fair daughter, and thou son and grandchild both, 
| High proof ye now have given to be the race 



BOOK X. 289 

Of Satan (for I glory in the name, 

Antagonist of Heaven's Almighty King), 

Amply have merited of me, of all 

The infernal empire, that so near Heaven's door 

Triumphal with triumphal act have met, 390 

Mine with this glorious work, and made one realm 

Hell and this World one realm, one continent 

Of easy thoroughfare. Therefore, while I 

Descend through darkness, on your road with ease, 

To my associate Powers, them to acquaint 

With these successes, and with them rejoice, 

You two this way, among these numerous orbs, 

All yours, right down to Paradise descend ; 

There dwell and reign in bliss ; thence on the Earth 

Dominion exercise and in the air, 400 

Chiefly on Man, sole lord of all declared; 

Him first make sure your thrall, and lastly kill. 

My substitutes I send ye, and create 

Plenipotent on Earth, of matchless might 

Issuing from me : on yo.ur joint vigour now 

My hold of this new kingdom all depends, 

Through Sin to Death exposed by my exploit. 

If your joint power prevail, the affairs of Hell 

No detriment need fear; go, and be strong." 

So saying, he dismissed them; they with speed 410 
Their course through thickest constellations held, 
Spreading their bane; the blasted stars looked wan, 
And planets, planet-struck, real eclipse 
Then suffered. The other way Satan went down 
The causey to Hell-gate; on either side 
Disparted Chaos over-built exclaimed, 
And with rebounding surge the bars assailed, 
That scorned his indignation. Through the gate, 

P. L. I9 



290 PARADISE LOST. 

Wide open and unguarded, Satan passed, 

And all about found desolate; for those 420 

Appointed to sit there had left their charge, 

Flown to the upper World; the rest were all 

Far to the inland retired, about the walls 

Of Pandemonium, city and proud seat 

Of Lucifer, so by allusion called 

Of that bright star to Satan paragoned; 

There kept their watch the legions, while the Grand 

In council sat, solicitous what chance 

Might intercept their Emperor sent; so he 

Departing gave command, and they observed. 430 

As when the Tartar from his Russian foe, 

By Astracan, over the snowy plains 

Retires, or Bactrian Sophi, from the horns 

Of Turkish crescent, leaves all waste beyond 

The realm of Aladule, in his retreat 

To Tauris or Casbeen: so these, the late 

Heaven-banished host, left desert utmost Hell 

Many a dark league, reduced in careful watch 

Round their metropolis, and now expecting 

Each hour their great adventurer from the search 440 

Of foreign worlds. He through the midst unmarked, 

In show plebeian Angel militant 

Of lowest order, passed ; and, from the door 

Of that Plutonian hall, invisible 

Ascended his high throne, which, under state 

Of richest texture spread, at the upper end 

Was placed in regal lustre. Down a while 

He sat, and round about him saw unseen. 

At last, as from a cloud, his fulgent head 

And shape star-bright appeared, or brighter, clad 450 

With what permissive glory since his fall 



BOOK X. 



2 9 I 



Was left him, or false glitter. All amazed 
At that so sudden blaze, the Stygian throng 
Bent their aspect, and whom they wished beheld, 
Their mighty Chief returned : loud was the acclaim. 
Forth rushed in haste the great consulting peers, 
Raised from their dark divan, and with like joy 
Congratulant approached him, who with hand 
Silence, and with these words attention, won: 

"Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers ! 460 
For in possession such, not only of right, 
I call ye, and declare ye now, returned, 
Successful beyond hope, to lead ye forth 
Triumphant out of this infernal pit 
Abominable, accursed, the house of woe, 
And dungeon of our tyrant ! Now possess, 
As lords, a spacious World, to our native Heaven 
Little inferior, by my adventure hard 
With peril great achieved. Long were to tell 
What I have done, what suffered, with what pain 470 
Voyaged the unreal, vast^ unbounded Deep 
Of horrible confusion, over which 
By Sin and Death a broad way now is paved, 
To expedite your glorious march; but I 
Toiled out my uncouth passage, forced to ride 
The untractable Abyss, plunged in the womb 
Of unoriginal Night and Chaos wild, 
That, jealous of their secrets, fiercely opposed 
My journey strange, with clamorous uproar 
Protesting Fate supreme; thence how I found 480 

The new-created World, which fame in Heaven 
Long had foretold, a fabric wonderful, 
Of absolute perfection; therein Man 
Placed in a Paradise, by our exile 

19 2 



PARADISE LOST. 

Made happy. Him by fraud I have seduced 

From his Creator, and, the more to increase 

Your wonder, with an apple! He, thereat 

Offended worth your laughter ! hath given up 

Both his beloved Man and all his World 

To Sin and Death a prey, and so to us, 

Without our hazard, labour, or alarm, 

To range in, and to dwell, and over Man 

To rule, as over all he should have ruled. 

True is, me also he hath judged, or rather 

Me not, but the brute serpent, in whose shape 

Man I deceived: that which to me belongs 

Is enmity, which he will put between 

Me and mankind; I am to bruise his heel; 

His seed when is not set shall bruise my head : 

A world who would not purchase with a bruise, 

Or much more grievous pain? Ye have the account 

Of my performance ; what remains, ye Gods, 

But up and enter now into full bliss?" 

So having said, a while he stood, expecting 
Their universal shout and high applause 
To fill his ear; when, contrary, he hears, 
On all sides, from innumerable tongues, 
A dismal universal hiss, the sound 
Of public scorn. He wondered, but not long . 
Had leisure, wondering at himself now more; 51 

His visage drawn he felt to sharp and spare, 
His arms clung to his ribs, his legs entwining 
Each other, till, supplanted, down he fell 
A monstrous serpent on his belly prone, 
Reluctant, but in vain; a greater power 
Now ruled him, punished in the shape he sinned, 
According to his doom. He would have spoke, 



BOOK X. 293 

But hiss for hiss returned with forked tongue 

To forked tongue; for now were all transformed 

Alike, to serpents all, as accessories 520 

To his bold riot. Dreadful was the din 

Of hissing through the hall, thick-swarming now 

With complicated monsters, head and tail, 

Scorpion, and asp, and amphisbasna dire, 

Cerastes horned, hydrus, and ellops drear, 

And dipsas (not so thick swarmed once the soil 

Bedropt with blood of Gorgon, or the isle 

Ophiusa); but still greatest he the midst, 

Now dragon grown, larger than whom the sun 

Engendered in the Pythian vale on slime, 530 

Huge Python; and his power no less he seemed 

Above the rest still to retain. They all 

Him followed, issuing forth to the open field, 

Where all yet left of that revolted rout, 

Heaven-fallen, in station stood or just array, 

Sublime with expectation when to see 

In triumph issuing forth their glorious Chief; 

They saw, but other sight instead, a crowd 

Of ugly serpents ! Horror on them fell, 

And horrid sympathy; for what they saw 540 

They felt themselves now changing : down their arms, 

Down fell both spear and shield; down they as fast, 

And the dire hiss renewed, and the dire form 

Catched by contagion, like in punishment, 

As in their crime. Thus was the applause they meant 

Turned to exploding hiss, triumph to shame 

Cast on themselves from their own mouths. There stood 

A grove hard by, sprung up with this their change, 

His will who reigns above, to aggravate 

Their penance, laden with fair fruit, like that 550 



294 PARADISE LOST. 

Which grew in Paradise, the bait of Eve 
Used by the Tempter. On that prospect strange 
Their earnest eyes they fixed, imagining 
For one forbidden tree a multitude 
Now risen, to work them further woe or shame; 
Yet, parched with scalding thirst and hunger fierce, 
Though to delude them sent, could not abstain, 
But on they rolled in heaps, and, up the trees 
Climbing, sat thicker than the snaky locks 
That curled Megaera. Greedily they plucked 560 

The fruitage fair to sight, like that which grew 
Near that bituminous lake where Sodom flamed; 
This, more delusive, not the touch, but taste 
Deceived; they, fondly thinking to allay 
Their appetite with gust, instead of fruit 
Chewed bitter ashes, which the offended taste 
With spattering noise rejected. Oft they assayed, 
Hunger and thirst constraining; drugged as oft, 
With hatefulest disrelish writhed their jaws, 
With soot and cinders filled; so oft they fell 570 

Into the same illusion, not as Man 

Whom they triumphed once lapsed. Thus were they plagued 
And worn with famine long, and ceaseless hiss, 
Till their lost shape, permitted, they resumed; 
Yearly enjoined, some say, to undergo 
This annual humbling certain numbered days, 
To dash their pride, and joy for Man seduced. 
However, some tradition they dispersed 
Among the heathen of their purchase got, 
And fabled how the Serpent, whom they called 580 

Ophion, with Eurynome (the wide- 
Encroaching Eve perhaps), had first the rule 
Of high Olympus, thence by Saturn driven 



BOOK X. 295 

And Ops, ere yet Dictsean Jove was born. 
Meanwhile in Paradise the Hellish pair 

Too soon arrived; Sin there in power before, 

Once actual, now in body, and to dwell 

Habitual habitant; behind her Death, 

Close following pace for pace, not mounted yet 

On his pale horse ; to whom Sin thus began : 590 

" Second of Satan sprung, all-conquering Death ! 

What think'st thou of our empire now, though earned 

With travail difficult? not better far 

Than still at Hell's dark threshold to have sat watch, 

Unnamed, undreaded, and thyself half-starved ? " 
Whom thus the Sin-born Monster answered soon : 

"To me, who with eternal famine pine, 

Alike is Hell, or Paradise, or Heaven; 

There best, where most with ravin I may meet; 

Which here, though plenteous, all too little seems 600 

To stuff this maw, this vast unhide-bound corpse." 

To whom the incestuous Mother thus replied: 
"Thou therefore on these herbs, and fruits, and flowers, 
Feed first; on each beast next, and fish, and fowl, 
No homely morsels; and whatever thing 
The scythe of Time mows down devour unspared; 
Till I, in Man residing, through the race, 
His thoughts, his looks, words, actions, all infect, 
And season him thy last and sweetest prey." 

This said, they both betook them several ways, 610 
Both to destroy, or unimmortal make 
All kinds, and for destruction to mature 
Sooner or later ; which the Almighty seeing, 
From his transcendent seat the Saints among, 
To those bright Orders uttered thus his voice: 
"See with what heat these dogs of Hell advance 



296 PARADISE LOST. 

To waste and havoc yonder World, which I 

So fair and good created, and had still 

Kept in that state, had not the folly of Man 

Let in these wasteful furies, who impute 620 

Folly to me (so doth the Prince of Hell 

And his adherents), that with so much ease 

I suffer them to enter and possess 

A place so heavenly, and conniving seem 

To gratify my scornful enemies, 

That laugh, as if, transported with some fit 

Of passion, I to them had quitted all, 

At random yielded up to their misrule; 

And know not that I called and drew them thither, 

My Hell-hounds, to lick up the draff and filth 630 

Which Man's polluting sin with taint hath shed 

On what was pure; till, crammed and gorged, nigh burst 

With sucked and glutted offal, at one sling 

Of thy victorious arm, well-pleasing Son, 

Both Sin, and Death, and yawning Grave at last, 

Through Chaos hurled, obstruct the mouth of Hell 

For ever, and seal up his ravenous jaws. 

Then Heaven and Earth, renewed, shall be made pure 

To sanctity that shall receive no stain : 

Till then the curse pronounced on both precedes." 640 

He ended, and the Heavenly audience loud 
Sung Halleluiah, as the sound of seas, 
Through multitude that sung : " Just are thy ways, 
Righteous are thy decrees on all thy works; 
Who can extenuate thee?" Next, to the Son, 
Destined restorer of mankind, by whom 
New Heaven and Earth shall to the ages rise, 
Or down from Heaven descend. Such was their song, 
While the Creator, calling forth by name 



BOOK X. ?99 

His mighty Angels, gave them several charge, 650 

As sorted best with present things. The sun 

Had first his precept so to move, so shine, 

As might affect the Earth with cold and heat 

Scarce tolerable, and from the north to call 

Decrepit winter, from the south to bring 

Solstitial summer's heat. To the blanc moon 

Her office they prescribed; to the other five 

Their planetary motions and aspects, 

In sextile, square, and trine, and opposite, 

Of noxious efficacy, and when to join 660 

In synod unbenign ; and taught the fixed 

Their influence malignant when to shower; 

Which of them rising with the sun, or falling, 

Should prove tempestuous. To the winds they set 

Their corners, when with bluster to confound 

Sea, air, and shore; the thunder when to roll 

With terror through the dark aerial hall. 

Some say he bid his Angels turn askance 

The poles of Earth twice ten degrees and more 

From the sun's axle; they with labour pushed 670 

Oblique the centric globe : some say the sun 

Was bid turn reins from the equinoctial road 

Like distant breadth to Taurus with the seven 

Atlantic Sisters, and the Spartan Twins, 

Up to the Tropic Crab; thence down amain 

By Leo and the Virgin and the Scales, 

As deep as Capricorn ; to bring in change 

Of seasons to each clime : else had the spring 

Perpetual smiled on Earth with vernant flowers, 

Equal in days and nights, except to those 680 

Beyond the polar circles; to them day 

Had unbenighted shone, while the low sun, 



296 



PARADISE LOST. 



To recompense his distance, in their sight 

Had rounded still the horizon, and not known 

Or east or west; which had forbid the snow 

From cold Estotiland, and south as far 

Beneath Magellan. At that tasted fruit 

The sun, as from Thyestean banquet, turned 

His course intended: else how had the World 

Inhabited, though sinless, more than now 690 

Avoided pinching cold and scorching heat? 

These changes in the heavens, though slow, produced 

Like change on sea and land, sideral blast, 

Vapour, and mist, and exhalation hot, 

Corrupt and pestilent. Now from the north 

Of Norumbega, and the Samoed shore, 

Bursting their brazen dungeon, armed with ice 

And snow and hail and stormy gust and flaw, 

Boreas and Csecias and Argestes loud 

And Thrascias rend the woods and seas upturn ; 700 

With adverse blasts upturns them from the south 

Notus and Afer black with thundrous clouds 

From Serraliona; thwart of these, as fierce 

Forth rush the Levant and the Ponent winds, 

Eurus and Zephyr with their lateral noise, 

Sirocco, and L'ibecchio. Thus began 

Outrage from lifeless things ; but Discord first, 

Daughter of Sin, among the irrational 

Death introduced through fierce antipathy : 

Beast now with beast 'gan war, and fowl with fowl, 710 

And fish with fish; to graze the herb all leaving 

Devoured each other; nor stood much in awe 

Of Man, but fled him, or with countenance grim 

Glared on him passing. These were from without 

The growing miseries, which Adam saw 



BOOK X. 299 

Already in part, though hid in gloomiest shade, 
To sorrow abandoned, but worse felt within, 
And, in a troubled sea of passion tost, 
Thus^ to disburden sought with sad complaint : 

"O miserable of happy! is this the end 720 

Of this new glorious World, and me so late 
The glory of that glory? who now, become 
Accursed of blessed, hide me from the face 
Of God, whom to behold was then my highth 
Of happiness ! Yet well, if here would end 
The misery; I deserved it, and would bear 
My own deservings ; but this will not serve : 
All that I eat or drink, or shall beget, 

: Is propagated curse. O voice, once heard 
j Delightfully, 'Increase and multiply'; 730 

V Now death to hear ! for what can I increase 

^Or multiply, but curses on my head? 
Who, of all ages to succeed, but, feeling 
The evil on him brought by me, will curse 

I My head ? * 111 fare our Ancestor impure ! 
For this we may thank- Adam ! ' but his thanks 
Shall be the execration ; so, besides 
Mine own that bide upon me, all from me 
Shall with a fierce reflux on me redound, 
On me, as on their natural centre, light 740 

Heavy, though in their place. O fleeting joys 

I Of Paradise, dear bought with lasting woes ! 
Did I request thee, Maker, from my clay 
To mould me Man? did I solicit thee 
From darkness to promote me, or here place 
In this delicious garden? As my will 
Concurred not to my being, it were but right 
And equal to reduce me to my dust, 



300 PARADISE LOST. 

Desirous to resign and render back 

All I received, unable to perform 750 

Thy terms too hard, by which I was to hold 
The good I sought not. To the loss of that, 
Sufficient penalty, why hast thou added 
The sense of endless woes? inexplicable 
Thy justice seems. Yet, to say truth, too late 
I thus contest; then should have been refused 
Those terms whatever, when they were proposed. 
Thou didst accept them : wilt thou enjoy the good, 
Then cavil the conditions? And though God 
Made thee without thy leave, what if thy son 760 

Prove disobedient, and, reproved, retort, 
'Wherefore didst thou beget me? I sought it notl* 
Wouldst thou admit for his contempt of thee 
That proud excuse? yet him not thy election, 
But natural necessity, begot. 

God made thee of choice his own, and of his own 
To serve him ; thy reward was of his grace ; 
Thy punishment then justly is at his will. 
Be it so, for I submit ; his doom is fair, 
That dust I am, and shall to dust return. 770 

O welcome hour whenever ! Why delays 
His hand to execute what his decree 
Fixed on this day? Why do I overlive? 
Why am I mocked with death, and lengthened out 
To deathless pain? How gladly would I meet 
Mortality, my sentence, and be earth 
Insensible ! how glad would lay me down 
As in my mother's lap ! There I should rest 
:And sleep secure; his dreadful voice no more 
Would thunder in my ears ; no fear of worse 780 

To me and to my offspring would torment me 



BOOK X. 301 

With cruel expectation. Yet one doubt 

Pursues me still, lest all I cannot die; 

I.est that pure breath of life, the spirit of Man 

Which God inspired, cannot together perish 

With this corporeal clod; then, in the grave, 

Or in some other dismal place, who knows 

But I shall die a living death? O thought 

Horrid, if true ! Yet why? It was but breath 

Of life that sinned : what dies but what had life 790 

And sin? the body properly hath neither. 

All of me then shall die: let this appease 

The doubt, since human reach no further knows. 

For though the Lord of all be infinite, 

Is his wrath also? Be it, Man is not so, 

But mortal doomed. How can he exercise 

Wrath without end on Man, whom death must end? 

Can he make deathless death? That were to make 

Strange contradiction ; which to God himself 

Impossible is held, as argument 800 

Of weakness, not of power. Will he draw out, 

For anger's sake, finite, to infinite 

In punished Man, to satisfy his rigour 

Satisfied never? That were to extend 

His sentence beyond dust and Nature's law; 

By which all causes else according still 

To the reception of their matter act, 

Not to the extent of their own sphere. But say 

That death be not one stroke, as I supposed, 

Bereaving sense, but endless misery 810 

From this day onward, which I feel begun 

Both in me and without me, and so last 

To perpetuity Ay me ! that fear 

Comes thundering back with dreadful revolution 






302 PARADISE LOST. 

On my defenceless head ! Both Death and I 
Am found eternal, and incorporate both : 
Nor I on my part single; in me all 
Posterity stands cursed. Fair patrimony 
That I must leave ye, sons ! Oh, were I able 
To waste it all myself, and leave ye none! 820 

So disinherited, how would ye bless 
Me, now your curse ! Ah, why should all mankind, 
For one man's fault, thus guiltless be condemned, 
If guiltless ? But from me what can proceed 
But all corrupt, both mind and will depraved 
Not to do only, but to will the same 
With me? How can they then acquitted stand 
In sight of God? Him, after all disputes, 
Forced I absolve; all my evasions vain 
And reasonings, though through mazes, lead me still 830 
But to my own conviction : first and last 
On me, me only, as the source and spring 
Of all corruption, all the blame lights due; 
; So might the wrath ! Fond wish ! couldst thou support 
That burden, heavier than the Earth to bear; 
Than all the World much heavier, though divided 
With that bad woman? Thus, what thou desir'st, 
And what thou fear'st, alike destroys all hope 
Of refuge, and concludes thee miserable 
Beyond all past example and future; 840 

To Satan only like, both crime and doom. 

Conscience ! into what abyss of fears 

And horrors hast thou driven me; out of which 

1 find no way, from deep to deeper plunged!" * 
J Thus Adam to himself lamented loud 
[Through the still night, not now, as ere Man fell, 
I Wholesome and cool and mild, but with black air 



BOOK X. 303 

Accompanied, with damps and dreadful gloom; 

Which to his evil conscience represented 

All things with double terror. On the ground 850 

Outstretched he lay, on the cold ground, and oft 

Cursed his creation; Death as oft accused 

Of tardy execution, since denounced 

The day of his offence. " Why comes not Death," 

Said he, "with one thrice-acceptable stroke 

To end me? Shall Truth fail to keep her word, 

Justice divine not hasten to be just? 

But Death comes not at call; Justice divine 

Mends not her slowest pace for prayers or cries. 

O woods, O fountains, hillocks, dales, and bowers ! 860 

With other echo late I taught your shades 

To answer, and resound far other song." 

Whom thus afflicted when sad Eve beheld, 

Desolate where she sat, approaching nigh, 

Soft words to his fierce passion she assayed; 

But her with stern regard he thus repelled : 

" Out of my sight, thou serpent ! that name best 
Befits thee, with him leagued, thyself as false 
And hateful : nothing wants, but that thy shape, 
Like his, and colour serpentine, may show 870 

Thy inward fraud, to warn all creatures from thee 
Henceforth; lest that too heavenly form, pretended 
To hellish falsehood, snare them. But for thee 
^ had persisted happy, had not thy pride 
And wandering vanity, when least was safe, 
Rejected my forewarning, and disdained 
Not to be trusted, longing to be seen, 
Though by the Devil himself, him overweening 
To overreach; but, with the Serpent meeting, 
Fooled and beguiled; by him thou, I by thee, 880 



304 PARADISE LOST. 



To trust thee from my side, imagined wise, 
> Constant, mature, proof against all assaults ; 
^ Yynd understood not all was but a show, 
tkather than solid virtue, all but a rib 
Crooked by nature bent, as now appears, 
"More to the part sinister from me drawn; 
Well if thrown out, as supernumerary 
To my just number found ! Oh, why did God, 
Creator wise, that peopled highest Heaven 
With Spirits masculine, create at last 890 

This novelty on Earth, this fair defect 
Of Nature, and not fill the World at once 
With men, as Angels, without feminine; 
Or find some other way to generate 
Mankind? This mischief had not then befallen, 
And more that shall befall innumerable 
Disturbances on Earth through female snares, 
PAnd strait conjunction with this sex^. For either 
He never shall find out fit mate, but such 
As some misfortune brings him, or mistake; 900 

Or whom he wishes most shall seldom gain, 
Through her perverseness, but shall see her gained 
By a far worse, or, if she love, withheld 
By parents; or his happiest choice too late 
Shall meet, already linked and wedlock-bound 
To a fell adversary, his hate or shame : 
Which infinite calamity shall cause 
I To human life, and household peace confound." 
He added not, and from her turned; but Eve, 
Not so repulsed, with tears that ceased not flowing, 910 
And tresses all disordered, at his feet 
Fell humble, and, embracing them, besought 
His peace, and thus proceeded in her plaint: 



BOOK X. 305 

" Forsake me not thus, Adam ! witness Heaven 
What love sincere and reverence in my heart 
I bear thee, and unweeting have offended, 
Unhappily deceived ! Thy suppliant 
I beg, and clasp thy knees; bereave me not, 
'Whereon I live, thy gentle looks, thy aid, 
Thy counsel in this uttermost distress, 920 

My only strength and stay : forlorn of thee, 
Whither shall I betake me, where subsist? 
**While yet we live, scarce one short hour perhaps, 
Between us two let there be peace ; both joining, 
' As joined in injuries, one enmity 

Against a foe by doom express assigned us, 

That cruel Serpent. On me exercise not 

Thy hatred for this misery befallen; 

On me already lost, me than thyself 

More miserable. Both have sinned; but thou 930 

Against God only; I against God and thee, 

And to the place of judgment will return, 

There with my cries importune Heaven, that all 

The sentence, from thy head removed, may light 

On me, sole cause to thee of all this woe, 

Me, me only, just object of His ire." 

She ended weeping; and her lowly plight, 
I Immovable till peace obtained from fault 
.! Acknowledged and deplored, in Adam wrought 
*" Commiseration. Soon his heart relented 940 

Towards her, his life so late and sole delight, 
Now at his feet submissive in distress, 
Creature so fair his reconcilement seeking, 
His counsel, whom she had displeased, his aid; 
As one disarmed, his anger all he lost, 
And thus with peaceful words upraised her soon : 



p. L. 



20 



306 PARADISE LOST. 

" Unwary, and too desirous, as before 
So now, of what thou know'st not, who desir'st 
The punishment all on thyself! Alas! 
Bear thine own first, ill able to sustain 950 

His full wrath, whose thou feel'st as yet least part, 
And my displeasure bear'st so ill. If prayers 
Could alter high decrees, I to that place 
Would speed before thee, and be louder heard, 
That on my head all might be visited, 
Thy frailty and infirmer sex forgiven, 
j To me committed, and by me exposed. 
" But rise ; let us no more contend, nor blame 
Each other, blamed enough elsewhere, but strive 
In offices of love, how we may lighten 960 

C-*. Each other's burden, in our share of woe; 

Since this day's death denounced, if aught I see, 
Will prove no sudden, but a slow-paced evil, 
A long day's dying, to augment our pain, 
..Aid to our seed (O hapless seed !) derived." 

To whom thus Eve, recovering heart, replied: 
"Adam, by sad experiment I know 
How little weight my words with thee can find, 
.Found so erroneous, thence by just event 
Found so unfortunate; nevertheless, 970 

Restored by thee, vile as I am, to place 
Of new acceptance, hopeful to regain 
Thy love, the sole contentment of my heart, 
Living or dying from thee I will not hide 
What thoughts in my unquiet breast are risen, 
Tending to some relief of our extremes, 
Or end, though sharp and sad, yet tolerable, 
As in our evils, and of easier choice. 
If care of our descent perplex us most, 



BOOK X. 307 

Which must be born to certain woe, devoured 980 

By Death at last (and miserable it is 
To be to others cause of misery, 
Our own begotten, and of our loins to bring 
Into this cursed World a woeful race, 
That after wretched life must be at last 
Food for so foul a monster), in thy power 
It lies, yet ere conception, to prevent 
The race unblest, to being yet unbegot. 
Childless thou art, childless remain; so Death 
Shall be deceived his glut, and with us two 990 

Be forced to satisfy his ravenous maw. 
But if thou judge it hard and difficult, 
Conversing, looking, loving, to abstain 
From love's due rites, nuptial embraces sweet, 
ft^jAnd with desire to languish without hope, 
Before the present object languishing 
With like desire, which would be misery 

i And torment less than none of what we dread; 

L Then, both our selves and seed at once to free 
From what we fear for both, let us make short, 1000 

Let us seek Death, or, he not found, supply 
With our own hands his office on ourselves. 
Why stand we longer shivering under fears 
That show no end but death, and have the power, 
Of many ways to die the shortest choosing, 
Destruction with destruction to destroy?" 

She ended here, or vehement despair 
Broke off the rest ; so much of death her thoughts 
Had entertained as dyed her cheeks with pale. 
But Adam, with such counsel nothing swayed, 1010 

To better hopes his more attentive mind 
Labouring had raised, and thus to Eve replied: 

20 2 



308 PARADISE LOST. 

"Eve, thy contempt of life and pleasure seems 
To argue in thee something more sublime 
And excellent than what thy mind contemns; 
But self-destruction therefore sought refutes 
That excellence thought in thee, and implies, 
Not thy contempt, but anguish and regret 
For loss of life and pleasure overloved. 
Or if thou covet death, as utmost end 1020 

Of misery, so thinking to evade 
The penalty pronounced, doubt not but God 
Hath wiselier armed his vengeful ire than so 
To be forestalled ; much more I fear lest death 
So snatched will not exempt us from the pain 
We are by doom to pay; rather such acts 
Of contumacy will provoke the Highest 
To make death in us live. Then let us seek 
Some safer resolution, which methinks 
I have in view, calling to mind with heed 1030 

Part of our sentence, that thy seed shall bruise 
The Serpent's head : piteous amends ! unless 
Be meant, whom I conjecture, our grand foe, 
Satan, who in the serpent hath contrived 
Against us this deceit. To crush his head 
Would be revenge indeed; which will be lost 
By death brought on ourselves, or childless days 
Resolved as thou proposest; so our foe 
Shall scape his punishment ordained, and we 
Instead shall double ours upon our heads. 1040 

No more be mentioned then of violence 
Against ourselves, and wilful barrenness, 
That cuts us off from hope, and savours only 
Rancour and pride, impatience and despite, 
Reluctance against God and his just yoke 



BOOK X. 309 

Laid on our necks. Remember with what mild 

And gracious temper he both heard and judged, 

Without wrath or reviling; we expected 

Immediate dissolution, which we thought 

Was meant by death that day; when, lo ! to thee 1050 

Pains only in child-bearing were foretold, 

And bringing forth, soon recompensed with joy, 

Fruit of thy womb ; on me the curse aslope 

Glanced on the ground : with iirtrurrr^im^ -earn 

My bread; what harm? Idleness- had- been worse ; 

My_Jabour will sustain ni; nnH r J4*sfc-f*4d 

Qrjigat should injure us, his timely care 

Hath, unbejsojight, -proJ4ed y -^and- his^ hands 

Clothed us unworthy, pitying while he judged ; 

How much more, if we pray frirn^ will hi? ^ar 1060 



Be open, and his heart to pity incline, 
jVnd. teach us further "by whaT means to shim 
The inr1pTT|frnfTeasons, ram, ice, hail, and snow! 
Which now the sky with various face begms 
To show us in this mountain, whife^trTe^winds 
Blow moist and keen," shattering the graceful locks 
Of these fair spreading trees ; which bids us seek 
Some better shroud, some better warmth to cherish 
Our limbs benumbed, ere this diurnal star 
Leave cold the night, how we his gathered beams 1070 
Reflected may with matter sere foment, 
Or by collision of two bodies grind 
The air attrite to fire; as late the clouds, 
Justling or pushed with winds, rude in their shock, 
Tine the slant lightning, whose thwart flame driven down 
Kindles the gummy bark of fir or pine, 
And sends a comfortable heat from far, 
Which might supply the sun. Such fire to use, 



310 PARADISE LOST. 

And what may else be remedy or cure 

To evils which our own misdeeds have wrought, 1080 

He will instruct us praying, and of grace 

Beseeching him; so as we need not fear 

To pass commodiously this life, sustained 

By him with many comforts, till we end 

In dust, our final rest and native home. 

What better can we do, than, to the place 

Repairing where he judged us, prostrate fall 

Before him reverent, and there confess 

Humbly our faults, and pardon beg, with tears 

Watering the ground, and with our sighs the air 1090 

Frequenting, sent from hearts contrite, in sign 

Of sorrow unfeigned and humiliation meek? 

Undoubtedly he will relent, and turn 

From his displeasure; in whose look serene, 

When angry most he seemed and most severe, 

What else but favour, grace, and mercy shone ? " 

So spake our father penitent; nor Eve 
Felt less remorse. They, forthwith to the place 
Repairing where he judged them, prostrate fell 
Before him reverent, and both confessed noo 

Humbly their faults, and pardon begged, with tears 
Watering the ground, and with their sighs the air 
Frequenting, sent from hearts contrite, in sign 
Of sorrow unfeigned and humiliation meek. 



BOOK XI. 



THE ARGUMENT. 

The Son of God presents to his Father the prayers of our first 
parents now repenting, and intercedes for them. God accepts them, 
but declares that they must no longer abide in Paradise ; sends Michael 
with a band of Cherubim to dispossess them, but first to reveal to Adam 
future things : Michael's coming down. Adam shows to Eve certain 
ominous signs ; he discerns Michael's approach > goes out to meet him : 
the Angel denounces their departure. Eve's lamentation. Adam pleads, 
but submits : the Angel leads him up to a high hill ; sets before him in 
vision what shall happen till the Flood. 






BOOK XL 



THUS they, in lowliest plight, repentant stood 
Praying; for from the mercy-seat above 
Prevenient grace descending had removed 
The stony from their hearts, and made new flesh 
Regenerate grow instead, that sighs now breathed 
Unutterable, which the Spirit of prayer 
Inspired, and winged for Heaven with speedier flight 
Than loudest oratory. Yet their port 
Not of mean suitors, nor important less 
Seemed their petition than when the ancient pair 10 

In fables old, less ancient yet than these, 
Deucalion and chaste Pyrrha, to restore 
The race of mankind drowned, before the shrine 
Of Themis stood devout. To Heaven their prayers 
Flew up, nor missed the way, by envious winds 
Blown vagabond or frustrate : in they passed 
Dimensionless through heavenly doors; then, clad 
With incense, where the golden altar fumed, 
By their great Intercessor, came in sight 
Before the Father's throne. Them the glad Son 20 

Presenting thus to intercede began : 

"See, Father, what first-fruits on Earth are sprung 



314 PARADISE LOST. 

From thy implanted grace in Man these sighs 

And prayers, which in this golden censer, mixed 

With incense, I, thy priest, before thee bring; 

Fruits of more pleasing savour, from thy seed 

Sown with contrition in his heart, than those 

Which, his own hand manuring, all the trees 

Of Paradise could have produced, ere fallen 

From innocence. Now, therefore, bend thine ear 30 

To supplication; hear his sighs, though mute: 

Unskilful with what words to pray, let me 

Interpret for him, me his advocate 

And propitiation; all his works on me, 

Good or not good, ingraft; my merit those 

Shall perfect, and for these my death shall pay. 

Accept me, and in me from these receive 

The smell of peace toward Mankind : let him live 

Before thee reconciled, at least his days 

Numbered, though sad ; till death, his doom (which I 40 

To mitigate thus plead, not to reverse), 

To better life shall yield him, where with me 

All my redeemed may dwell in joy and bliss, 

Made one with me, as I with thee am one." 

To whom the Father, without cloud, serene: 
"All thy request for Man, accepted Son, 
Obtain; all thy request was my decree. 
But longer in that Paradise to dwell 
The law I gave to Nature him forbids; 
Those pure immortal elements, that know 50 

No gross, no unharmonious mixture foul, 
Eject him, tainted now, and purge him off, 
As a distemper, gross, to air as gross, 
And mortal food, as may dispose him best 
For dissolution wrought by sin, that first 



BOOK XL 315 

Distempered all things, and of incorrupt 

Corrupted. I, at first, with two fair gifts 

Created him endowed with happiness 

And immortality ; that fondly lost, 

This other served but to eternize woe, 60 

Till I provided death : so death becomes 

His final remedy, and, after life 

Tried in sharp tribulation, and refined 

By faith and faithful works, to second life, 

Waked in the renovation of the just, 

Resigns him up with Heaven and Earth renewed. 

But let us call to Synod all the Blest 

Through Heaven's wide bounds ; from them I will not hide 

My judgments, how with Mankind I proceed, 

As how with peccant Angels late they saw, 70 

And in their state, though firm, stood more confirmed." 

He ended, and the Son gave signal high 
To the bright minister that watched. He blew 
His trumpet, heard in Oreb since perhaps 
When God descended, and perhaps once more 
To sound at general doom. The angelic blast 
Filled all the regions : from their blissful bowers 
Of amarantine shade, fountain or spring, 
By the waters of life, where'er they sat 
In fellowships of joy, the Sons of Light 80 

Hasted, resorting to the summons high, 
And took their seats, till from his throne supreme 
The Almighty thus pronounced his sovran will : 

"O Sons, like one of us Man is become 
To know both good and evil, since his taste 
Of that defended fruit; but let him boast 
His knowledge of good lost and evil got, 
Happier had it sufficed him to have known 



316 PARADISE LOST. 

Good by itself, and evil not at all. 

He sorrows now, repents, and prays contrite 90 

My motions in him ; longer than they move, 

His heart I know how variable and vain, 

Self-left. Lest, therefore, his now bolder hand 

Reach also of the Tree of Life, and eat, 

And live for ever dream at least to live 

For ever to remove him I decree, 

And send him from the garden forth, to till 

The ground whence he was taken, fitter soil. 

Michael, this my behest have thou in charge : 

Take to thee from among the Cherubim 100 

Thy choice of flaming warriors, lest the Fiend, 

Or in behalf of Man, or to invade 

Vacant possession, some new trouble raise; 

Haste thee, and from the Paradise of God 

Without remorse drive out the sinful pair, 

From hallowed ground the unholy, and denounce 

To them, and to their progeny, from thence 

Perpetual banishment. Yet, lest they faint 

At the sad sentence rigorously .urged 

(For I behold them softened, and with tears no 

Bewailing their excess), all terror hide. 

If patiently thy bidding they obey, 

Dismiss them not disconsolate; reveal 

To Adam what shall come in future days, 

As I shall thee enlighten; intermix 

My covenant in the Woman's seed renewed. 

So send them forth, though sorrowing, yet in peace; 

And on the east side of the garden place, 

Where entrance up from Eden easiest climbs, 

Cherubic watch, and of a sword the flame 120 

Wide-waving, all approach far off to fright, 



BOOK XI. 317 

And guard all passage to the Tree of Life; 

Lest Paradise a receptacle prove 

To Spirits foul, and all my trees their prey, 

With whose stolen fruit Man once more to delude." 

He ceased, and the archangelic Power prepared 
For swift descent; with him the cohort bright 
Of watchful Cherubim. Four faces each 
Had, like a double Janus; all their shape 
Spangled with eyes more numerous than those 130 

Of Argus, and more wakeful than to drowse, 
Charmed with Arcadian pipe, the pastoral reed 
Of Hermes, or his opiate rod. Meanwhile, 
To resalute the world with sacred light, 
Leucothea waked, and with fresh dews embalmed 
The Earth; when Adam and first matron Eve 
Had ended now their orisons, and found 
Strength added from above; new hope to spring 
Out of despair ; joy, but with fear yet linked ; 
Which thus to Eve his welcome words renewed : 140 

"Eve, easily may faith admit that all 
The good which we enjoy from Heaven descends ; 
But that from us aught should ascend to Heaven 
So prevalent as to concern the mind 
Of God high-blest, or to incline his will, 
Hard to belief may seem ; yet this will prayer, 
Or one short sigh of human breath, upborne 
Even to the seat of God. For, since I sought 
By prayer the offended Deity to appease, 
Kneeled and before him humbled all my heart, 150 

Methought I saw him placable and mild, 
Bending his ear; persuasion in me grew 
That I was heard with favour ; peace returned 
Home to my breast, and to my memory 



3l8 PARADISE LOST. 

His promise that thy seed shall bruise our Foe; 

Which, then not minded in dismay, yet now 

Assures me that the bitterness of death 

Is past, and we shall live. Whence hail to thee! 

Eve rightly called, Mother of all Mankind, 

Mother of all things living, since by thee 160 

Man is to live, and all things live for Man." 

To whom thus Eve with sad demeanour meek: 
" Ill-worthy I such title should belong 
To me transgressor, who, for thee ordained 
A help, became thy snare; to me reproach 
Rather belongs, distrust and all dispraise. 
But infinite in pardon was my Judge, 
That I, who first brought death on all, am graced 
The source of life; next favourable thou, 
Who highly thus to entitle me vouchsaf'st, 170 

Far other name deserving. But the field 
To labour calls us, now with sweat imposed, 
Though after sleepless night ; for see ! the Morn, 
All unconcerned with our unrest, begins 
Her rosy progress smiling. Let us forth, 
I never from thy side henceforth to stray, 
Where'er our day's work lies, though now enjoined 
Laborious, till day droop; while here we dwell, 
What can be toilsome in these pleasant walks? 
Here let us live, though in fallen state, content." 180 

So spake, so wished, much-humbled Eve; but Fate 
Subscribed not. Nature first gave signs, impressed 
On bird, beast, air air suddenly eclipsed, 
After short blush of morn. Nigh in her sight 
The bird of Jove, stooped from his aery tour, 
Two birds of gayest plume before him drove; 
Down from a hill the beast that reigns in woods, 



BOOK XI. 319 

First hunter then, pursued a gentle brace, 

Goodliest of all the forest, hart and hind ; 

Direct to the eastern gate was bent their flight. 190 

Adam observed, and, with his eye the chase 

Pursuing, not unmoved to Eve thus spake : 

"O Eve, some further change awaits us nigh, 
Which Heaven by these mute signs in Nature shows, 
Forerunners of his purpose, or to warn 
Us, haply too secure of our discharge 
From penalty because from death released 
Some days; how long, and what till then our life, 
Who knows? or more than this, that we are dust, 
And thither must return, and be no more? 200 

Why else this double object in our sight, 
Of flight pursued in the air and o'er the ground 
One way the self-same hour? Why in the east 
Darkness ere day's mid-course, and morning-light 
More orient in yon western cloud, that draws 
O'er the blue firmament a radiant white, 
And slow descends, with something Heavenly fraught?" 

He erred not; for, by this, the Heavenly bands 
Down from a sky of jasper lighted now 
In Paradise, and on a hill made halt; 210 

A glorious apparition, had not doubt 
And carnal fear that day dimmed Adam's eye. 
Not that more glorious, when the Angels met 
Jacob in Mahanaim, where he saw 
The field pavilioned with his guardians bright; 
Nor that which on the flaming mount appeared 
In Dothan, covered with a camp of fire, 
Against the Syrian king, who to surprise 
One man, assassin-like, had levied war, 
War unproclaimed. The princely Hierarch ' 220 



320 PARADISE LOoT. 

In their bright stand there left his Powers to seize 

Possession of the garden; he alone, 

To find where Adam sheltered, took his way, 

Not unperceived of Adam ; who to Eve, 

While the great visitant approached, thus spake: 

"Eve, now expect great tidings, which perhaps 
Of us will soon determine, or impose 
New laws to be observed; for I descry, 
From yonder blazing cloud that veils the hill, 
One of the Heavenly host, and, by his gait, 230 

None of the meanest some great Potentate 
Or of the Thrones above, such majesty 
Invests him coming; yet not terrible, 
That I should fear, nor sociably mild, 
As Raphael, that I should much confide; 
But solemn and sublime; whom, not to offend, 
With reverence I must meet, and thou retire." 

He ended; and the Archangel soon drew nigh, 
Not in his shape celestial, but as man 
Clad to meet man. Over his lucid arms 240 

A military vest of purple flowed, 
Livelier than Meliboean, or the grain 
Of Sarra, worn by kings and heroes old 
In time of truce; Iris had dipt the woof. 
His starry helm unbuckled showed him prime 
In manhood where youth ended; by his side, 
As in a glistering zodiac, hung the sword, 
Satan's dire dread, and in his hand the spear. 
Adam bowed low; he, kingly, from his state 
Inclined not, but his coming thus declared : 250 

" Adam, Heaven's high behest no preface needs : 
Sufficient that thy prayers are heard, and Death, 
Then due by sentence when thou didst transgress, 



BOOK XI. 321 

Defeated of his seizure many days, 

Given thee of grace, wherein thou may'st repent, 

And one bad act with many deeds well done 

May'st cover. Well may then thy Lord, appeased, 

Redeem thee quite from Death's rapacious claim; 

But longer in this Paradise to dwell 

Permits not: to remove thee I am come, 260 

And send thee from the garden forth, to till 

The ground whence thou wast taken, fitter soil." 

He added not; for Adam at the news 
Heart-strook with chilling gripe of sorrow stood, 
That all his senses bound; Eve, who unseen 
Yet all had heard, with audible lament 
Discovered soon the place of her retire : 

" O unexpected stroke, worse than of Death ! 
Must I thus leave thee, Paradise? thus leave 
Thee, native soil? these happy walks and shades, 270 
Fit haunt of Gods ? where I had hope to spend, 
Quiet, though sad, the respite of that day 
That must be mortal to us both. O flowers, 
That never will in other climate grow, 
My early visitation, and my last 
At even, which I bred up with tender hand 
From the first opening bud, and gave ye names, 
Who now shall rear ye to the sun, or rank 
Your tribes, and water from the ambrosial fount? 
Thee, lastly, nuptial bower, by me adorned 280 

With what to sight or smell was sweet, from thee 
How shall I part, and whither wander down 
Into a lower world, to this obscure 
And wild? How shall we breathe in other air 
Less pure, accustomed to immortal fruits?" 

Whom thus the Angel interrupted mild: 

P. L. 21 



322 PARADISE LOST. 

k< Lament not, Eve, but patiently resign 

What justly thou hast lost; nor set thy heart, 

Thus over-fond, on that which is not thine. 

Thy going is not lonely ; with thee goes 290 

Thy husband; him to follow thou art bound; 

Where he abides, think there thy native soil." 

Adam, by this from the cold sudden damp 
Recovering, and his scattered spirits returned, 
To Michael thus his humble words addressed : 

" Celestial, whether among the Thrones, or named 
Of them the highest for such of shape may seem 
Prince above princes gently hast thou told 
Thy message, which might else in telling wound, 
And in performing end us. What besides 300 

Of sorrow, and dejection, and despair, 
Our frailty can sustain, thy tidings bring; 
Departure from this happy place, our sweet 
Recess, and only consolation left 
Familiar to our eyes ; all places else 
Inhospitable appear, and desolate, 
Nor knowing us, nor known. And, if by prayer 
Incessant I could hope to change the will 
Of him who all things can, I would not cease 
To weary him with my assiduous cries; 310 

But prayer against his absolute decree 
No more avails than breath against the wind, 
Blown stifling back on him that breathes it forth: 
Therefore to his great bidding I submit. 
This most afflicts me, that, departing hence, 
As from his face I shall be hid, deprived 
His blessed countenance. Here I could frequent, 
With worship, place by place where he vouchsafed 
Presence Divine, and to my sons relate, 



BOOK XI. 323 

' On this mount he appeared ; under this tree 320 

Stood visible ; among these pines his voice 

I heard; here with him at this fountain talked.' 

So many grateful altars I would rear 

Of grassy turf, and pile up every stone 

Of lustre from the brook, in memory 

Or monument to ages, and thereon 

Offer sweet-smelling gums, and fruits, and flowers. 

In yonder nether world where shall I seek 

His bright appearances, or footstep trace? 

For, though I fled him angry, yet, recalled 330 

To life prolonged and promised race, I now 

Gladly behold though but his utmost skirts 

Of glory, and far off his steps adore." 

To whom thus Michael, with regard benign : 
"Adam, thou know'st Heaven his, and all the Earth, 
Not this rock only ; his omnipresence fills 
Land, sea, and air, and every kind that lives, 
Fomented by his virtual power and warmed. 
All the Earth he gave thee to possess and rule, 
No despicable gift; surmise not, then, 340 

His presence to these narrow bounds confined 
Of Paradise or Eden. This had been 
Perhaps thy capital seat, from whence had spread 
All generations, and had hither come 
From all the ends of the Earth, to celebrate 
And reverence thee their great progenitor. 
But this pre-eminence thou hast lost, brought down 
To dwell on even ground now with thy sons. 
Yet doubt not but in valley and in plain 
God is, as here, and will be found alike 350 

Present, and of his presence many a sign, 
Still following thee, still compassing thee round 

21 2 



324 PARADISE LOST. 

With goodness and paternal love, his face 

Express, and of his steps the track divine. 

Which that thou may'st believe, and be confirmed, 

Ere thou from hence depart, know I am sent 

To show thee what shall come in future days 

To thee and to thy offspring. Good with bad 

Expect to hear, supernal grace contending 

With sinfulness of men; thereby to learn 360 

True patience, and to temper joy with fear 

And pious sorrow, equally inured 

By moderation either state to bear, 

Prosperous or adverse : so shalt thou lead 

Safest thy life, and best prepared endure 

Thy mortal passage when it comes. Ascend 

This hill; let Eve (for I have drenched her eyes) 

Here sleep below while thou to foresight wak'st, 

As once thou slept'st, while she to life was formed." 

 To whom thus Adam gratefully replied: 370 

"Ascend; I follow thee, safe guide, the path 
Thou lead'st me, and to the hand of Heaven submit, 
However chastening; to the evil turn 
My obvious breast, arming to overcome 
By suffering, and earn rest from labour won, 
If so I may attain." So both ascend 

s In the visions of God. It was a hill, 

Of Paradise the highest, from whose top 

! The hemisphere of Earth, in clearest ken, 
Stretched out to the amplest reach of prospect lay. 380 

' Not higher that hill, nor wider looking round, 

i Whereon for different cause the Tempter set 
Our second Adam, in the wilderness, 

: To show him all Earth's kingdoms and their glory. 

j His eye might there command wherever stood 



BOOK XL 325 

City of old or modern fame, the seat 

Of mightiest empire, from the destined walls 

Of Cambalu, seat of Cathaian Can, 

And Samarchand by Oxus, Temir's throne, 

To Paquin of Sinaean kings, and thence 390 

To Agra and Lahor of Great Mogul, 

Down to the golden Chersonese, or where 

The Persian in Ecbatan sat, or since 

In Hispahan, or where the Russian Ksar 

In Mosco, or the Sultan in Bizance, 

Turchestan-born ; nor could his eye not ken 

The empire of Negus to his utmost port 

Ercoco, and the less maritime kings, 

Mombaza, and Quiloa, and Melind, 

And Sofala, thought Ophir, to the realm 400 

Of Congo, and Angola farthest south ; 

Or thence from Niger flood to Atlas mount, 

The kingdoms of Almansor, Fez and Sus, 

Marocco, and Algiers, and Tremisen ; 

On Europe thence, and where Rome was to sway 

The world. In spirit perhaps he also saw 

Rich Mexico, the seat of Montezume, 

And Cusco in Peru, the richer seat 

Of Atabalipa, and yet unspoiled 

Guiana, whose great city Geryon's sons 410 

Call El Dorado. But to nobler sights 

Michael from Adam's eyes the film removed 

Which that false fruit that promised clearer sight 

Had bred; then purged with euphrasy and rue 

The visual nerve, for he had much to see, 

And from the well of life three drops instilled. 

So deep the power of these ingredients pierced, 

Even to the inmost seat of mental sight, 



326 PARADISE LOST. 

That Adam, now enforced to close his eyes, 

Sunk down, and all his spirits became entranced ; 420 

But him the gentle Angel by the hand 

Soon raised, and his attention thus recalled : 

"Adam, now ope thine eyes, and first behold 
The effects which thy original crime hath wrought 
In some to spring from thee, who never touched 
The excepted tree, nor with the Snake conspired, 
Nor sinned thy sin, yet from that sin derive 
Corruption to bring forth more violent deeds." 

His eyes he opened, and beheld a field, 
Part arable and tilth, whereon were sheaves 450 

New-reaped, the other part sheep-walks and folds; 
I' the midst an altar as the landmark stood, 
Rustic, of grassy sord. Thither anon 
A sweaty reaper from his tillage brought 
First-fruits, the green ear and the yellow sheaf, 
Unculled, as came to hand; a shepherd next, 
More meek, came with the firstlings of his flock, 
Choicest and best; then, sacrificing, laid 
The inwards and their fat, with incense strewed, 
On the cleft wood, and all due rites performed. 440 

His offering soon propitious fire from heaven 
Consumed with nimble glance and grateful steam; 
The other's not, for his was not sincere : 
Whereat he inly raged, and, as they talked, 
Smote him into the midriff with a stone 
That beat out life; he fell, and, deadly pale, 
Groaned out his soul with gushing blood effused. 
Much at that sight was Adam in his heart 
Dismayed, and thus in haste to the Angel cried : 

"O Teacher, some great mischief hath befallen 450 
To that meek man, who well had sacrificed : 



BOOK XI. 327 

Is piety thus and pure devotion paid?" 

To whom Michael thus, he also moved, replied : 
"These two are brethren, Adam, and to come 
Out of thy loins. The unjust the just hath slain, 
For envy that his brother's offering found 
From Heaven acceptance; but the bloody fact 
Will be avenged, and the other's faith approved 
Lose no reward, though here thou see him die, 
Rolling in dust and gore." To which our Sire: 460 

" Alas, both for the deed and for the cause ! 
But have I now seen Death? Is this the way 
I must return to native dust? O sight 
Of terror, foul and ugly to behold ! 
Horrid to think, how horrible to feel ! " 

To whom thus Michael : " Death thou hast seen 
In his first shape on Man; but many shapes 
Of Death, and many are the ways that lead 
To his grim cave, all dismal; yet to sense 
More terrible at the entrance than within. 470 

Some, as thou saw'st, by violent stroke shall die, 
By fire, flood, famine ; by intemperance more 
In meats and drinks, which on the Earth shall bring 
Diseases dire, of which a monstrous crew 
Before thee shall appear, that thou may'st know 
What misery the inabstinence of Eve 
Shall bring on men." Immediately a place 
Before his eyes appeared, sad, noisome, dark ; 
A lazar-house it seemed, wherein were laid 
Numbers of all diseased, all maladies 480 

Of ghastly spasm, or racking torture, qualms 
Of heart-sick agony, all feverous kinds, 
Convulsions, epilepsies, fierce catarrhs, 
Intestine stone and ulcer, colic pangs, 



328 PARADISE LOST. 

Demoniac phrenzy, moping melancholy, 

And moon-struck madness, pining atrophy, 

Marasmus, and wide-wasting pestilence, 

Dropsies and asthmas, and joint-racking rheums. 

Dire was the tossing, deep the groans; Despair 

Tended the sick, busiest from couch to couch; 490 

And over them triumphant Death his dart 

Shook, but delayed to strike, though oft invoked 

With vows, as their chief good and final hope. 

Sight so deform what heart of rock could long 

Dry-eyed behold? Adam could not, but wept, 

Though not of woman born : compassion quelled 

His best of man, and gave him up to tears 

A space, till firmer thoughts restrained excess, 

And, scarce recovering words, his plaint renewed : 

"O miserable Mankind, to what fall 500 

Degraded, to what wretched state reserved ! 
Better end here unborn. Why is life given 
To be thus wrested from us? rather why 
Obtruded on us thus? who, if we knew 
What we receive, would either not accept 
Life offered, or soon beg to lay it down, 
Glad to be so dismissed in peace. Can thus 
The image of God in Man, created once 
So goodly and erect, though faulty since, 
To such unsightly sufferings be debased 510 

Under inhuman pains? Why should not Man, 
Retaining still divine similitude 
In part, from such deformities be free, 
And for his Maker's image sake exempt?" 

"Their Maker's image," answered Michael, "then 
Forsook them, when themselves they vilified 
To serve ungoverned Appetite, and took 



BOOK XI. 329 

His image whom they served a brutish vice, 
Inductive mainly to the sin of Eve. 

Therefore so abject is their punishment, 520 

Disfiguring not God's likeness, but their own; 
Or, if his likeness, by themselves defaced 
While they pervert pure Nature's healthful rules 
To loathsome sickness; worthily, since they 
God's image did not reverence in themselves." 
"I yield it just," said Adam, "and submit. 
But is there yet no other way, besides 
These painful passages, how we may come 
To death, and mix with our connatural dust?" 

"There is," said Michael, "if thou well observe 530 
The rule of^Not too muchly temperance taught 
In what thou eat ; st and dnnJt'st, seeking from thence 
Due nourishment, not gluttpnou^TcTelight, 
Till many years over thy head return. 

o may'st thou live, till, like ripe fruit, thou drop 

nto thy mother's lap, or be with ease 

athered, not harshly plucked, for death mature. 

his is old age; but then thou must outlive 

youth, thy strength, thy beauty, which will change 

'o withered, weak, and grey; thy senses then, 540 

btuse, all taste of pleasure must forgo 
what thou hast; and, for the air of youth, 

hopeful and cheerful, in thy blood will reign 
melancholy damp of cold and dry, 

"o weigh thy spirits down, and last consume 

'he balm of life." To whom our Ancestor : 

"Henceforth I fly not death, nor would prolong 
Life much, bent rather how I may be quit, 
Fairest and easiest, of this cumbrous charge, 
Which I must keep till my appointed day 550 



33O PARADISE LOST. 

Of rendering up, and patiently attend 
My dissolution." Michael replied : 

"Nor love thy life, nor hate; but what thou livest 
Live well; how long or short, permit to Heaven. 
And now prepare thee for another sight." 

He looked, and saw a spacious plain, whereon 
Were tents of various hue ; by some were herds 
Of cattle grazing ; others, whence the sound 
Of instruments that made melodious chime 
Was heard, of harp and organ, and who moved 560 

Their stops and chords was seen ; his volant touch 
Instinct through all proportions, low and high, 
Fled and pursued transverse the resonant fugue. 
In other part stood one who, at the forge 
Labouring, two massy clods of iron and brass 
Had melted (whether found where casual fire 
Had wasted woods, on mountain or in vale, 
Down to the veins of Earth, thence gliding hot 
To some cave's mouth, or whether washed by stream 
From underground) ; the liquid ore he drained 570 

Into fit moulds prepared; from which he formed 
First his own tools; then, what might else be wrought 
Fusil or graven in metal. After these, 
But on the hither side, a different sort 
From the high neighbouring hills, which was their seat, 
Down to the plain descended : by their guise 
Just men they seemed, and all their study bent 
To worship God aright, and know his works 
Not hid; nor those things last which might preserve 
Freedom and peace to men. They on the plain 580 
Long had not walked, when from the tents behold 
A bevy of fair women, richly gay 
In gems and wanton dress ! to the harp they sung 



BOOK XI. 331 

Soft amorous ditties, and in dance came on. 

The men, though grave, eyed them, and let their eyes 

Rove without rein, till, in the amorous net 

Fast caught, they liked, and each his liking chose. 

And now of love they treat, till the evening-star, 

Love's harbinger, appeared ; then, all in heat, 

They light the nuptial torch, and bid invoke 590 

Hymen, then first to marriage rites invoked : 

With feast and music all the tents resound. 

Such happy interview, and fair event 

Of love and youth not lost, songs, garlands, flowers, 

And charming symphonies, attached the heart 

Of Adam, soon inclined to admit delight, 

The bent of Nature ; which he thus expressed : 

"True opener of mine eyes, prime Angel blest, 
Much better seems this vision, and more hope 
Of peaceful days portends, than those two past : 600 

Those were of hate and death, or pain much worse; 
Here Nature seems fulfilled in all her ends." 

To whom thus Michael : " Judge not what is best 
By pleasure, though to. Nature seeming meet, 
Created, as thou art, to nobler end, 
Holy and pure, conformity divine. 
Those tents thou saw'st so pleasant were the tents 
Of wickedness, wherein shall dwell his race 
Who slew his brother: studious they appear 
Of arts that polish life, inventors rare; 610 

Unmindful of their Maker, though his Spirit 
Taught them; but they his gifts acknowledged none. 
Yet they a beauteous offspring shall beget; 
For that fair female troop thou saw'st, that seemed 
Of goddesses, so blithe, so smooth, so gay, 
Yet empty of all good wherein consists 



332 PARADISE LOST. 

Woman's domestic honour and chief praise; 

Bred only and completed to the taste 

Of lustful appetence, to sing, to dance, 

To dress, and troll the tongue, and roll the eye ; 620 

To these that sober race of men, whose lives 

Religious titled them the Sons of God, 

Shall yield up all their virtue, all their fame, 

Ignobly, to the trains and to the smiles 

Of these fair atheists, and now swim in joy 

(Erelong to swim at large) and laugh ; for which 

The world erelong a world of tears must weep." 

To whom thus Adam, of short joy bereft : 
"O pity and shame, that they who to live well 
Entered so fair should turn aside to tread 630 

Paths indirect, or in the midway faint ! 
But still I see the tenor of Man's woe 
Holds on the same, from Woman to begin." 

"From Man's effeminate slackness it begins," 
Said the Angel, "who should better hold his place 
By wisdom, and superior gifts received. 
But now prepare thee for another scene." 

He looked, and saw wide territory spread 
Before him towns, and rural works between, 
Cities of men with lofty gates and towers, 640 

Concourse in arms, fierce faces threatening war, 
Giants of mighty bone and bold emprise ; 
Part wield their arms, part curb the foaming steed, 
Single or in array of battle ranged, 
Both horse and foot, nor idly mustering stood. 
One way a band select from forage drives 
A herd of beeves, fair oxen and fair kine, 
From a fat meadow-ground, or fleecy flock, 
Ewes and their bleating lambs, over the plain, 



BOOK XL 333 

Their booty; scarce with life the shepherds fly, 650 

But call in aid, which makes a bloody fray : 

With cruel tournament the squadrons join; 

Where cattle pastured late, now scattered lies 

With carcasses and arms the ensanguined field 

Deserted. Others to a city strong 

Lay siege, encamped, by battery, scale, and mine, 

Assaulting; others from the wall defend 

With dart and javelin, stones and sulphurous fire ; 

On each hand slaughter and gigantic deeds. 

In other part the sceptred haralds call 660 

To council in the city-gates : anon 

Grey-headed men and grave, with warriors mixed, 

Assemble, and harangues are heard; but soon 

In factious opposition, till at last 

Of middle age one rising, eminent 

In wise deport, spake much of right and wrong, 

Of justice, of religion, truth, and peace, 

And judgment from above : him old and young 

Exploded, and had seized with violent hands, 

Had not a cloud descending snatched him thence, 670 

Unseen amid the throng. So violence 

Proceeded, and oppression, and sword-law, 

Through all the plain, and refuge none was found. 

Adam was all in tears, and to his guide 

Lamenting turned full sad: "Oh, what are these? 

Death's ministers, not men ! who thus deal death 

Inhumanly to men, and multiply 

Ten thousandfold the sin of him who slew 

His brother; for of whom such massacre 

Make they but of their brethren, men of men? 680 

But who was that just man, whom had not Heaven 

Rescued, had in his righteousness been lost?" 



334 PARADISE LOST. 

To whom thus Michael : " These are the product 
Of those ill-mated marriages thou saw'st; 
Where good with bad were matched, who of themselves 
Abhor to join, and, by imprudence mixed, 
Produce prodigious births of body or mind. 
Such were these Giants, men of high renown ; 
For in those days might only shall be admired, 
And valour and heroic virtue called ; 690 

To overcome in battle, and subdue 
Nations, and bring home spoils with infinite 
Man-slaughter, shall be held the highest pitch 
Of human glory, and for glory done 
Of triumph, to be styled great conquerors, 
Patrons of mankind, gods, and sons of gods 
Destroyers rightlier called, and plagues of men. 
Thus fame shall be achieved, renown on Earth, 
And what most merits fame in silence hid. 
But he, the seventh from thee, whom thou beheld'st 700 
The only righteous in a world perverse, 
And therefore hated, therefore so beset 
With foes, for daring single to be just, 
And utter odious truth, that God would come 
To judge them with his Saints him the Most High, 
Rapt in a balmy cloud with winged steeds, 
Did, as thou saw'st, receive, to walk with God 
High in salvation and the climes of bliss, 
Exempt from death : to show thee what reward 
Awaits the good, the rest what punishment; 710 

Which now direct thine eyes and soon behold." 

He looked, and saw the face of things quite changed; 
The brazen throat of war had ceased to roar; 
All now was turned to jollity and game, 
To luxury and riot, feast and dance, 






BOOK XI. 

Marrying or prostituting, as befell, 

Rape or adultery, where passing fair 

Allured them; thence from cups to civil broils. 

At length a reverend sire among them came, 

And of their doings great dislike declared, 720 

And testified against their ways : he oft 

Frequented their assemblies, whereso met, 

Triumphs or festivals, and to them preached 

Conversion and repentance, as to souls 

In prison, under judgments imminent; 

But all in vain. Which when he saw, he ceased 

Contending, and removed his tents far off; 

Then, from the mountain hewing timber tall, 

Began to build a vessel of huge bulk, 

Measured by cubit, length, and breadth, and highth, 730 

Smeared round with pitch, and in the side a door 

Contrived, and of provisions laid in large 

For man and beast : when lo ! a wonder strange ! 

Of every beast, and bird, and insect small, 

Came sevens and pairs, and entered in, as taught 

Their order; last, the sire and his three sons, 

With their four wives; and God made fast the door. 

Meanwhile the south-wind rose, and, with black wings 

Wide hovering, all the clouds together drove 

From under heaven; the hills, to their supply, 740 

Vapour, and exhalation dusk and moist, 

Sent up amain ; and now the thickened sky 

Like a dark ceiling stood : down rushed the rain 

Impetuous, and continued till the Earth 

No more was seen. The floating vessel swum 

Uplifted, and secure with beaked prow 

Rode tilting o'er the waves; all dwellings else 

Flood overwhelmed, and them with all their pomp 



. PARADISE LOST. 

334 



under water rolled; sea covered sea, 
Sea without shore : and in their palaces, 750 

Where luxury late reigned, sea-monsters whelped 
And stabled : of mankind, so numerous late, 
All left in one small bottom swum embarked. 
How didst thou grieve then, Adam, to behold 
The end of all thy offspring, end so sad, 
Depopulation ! Thee another flood, 
Of tears and sorrow a flood, thee also drowned, 
And sunk thee as thy sons; till, gently reared 
By the Angel, on thy feet thou stood'st at last, 
Though comfortless, as when a father mourns 760 

His children, all in view destroyed at once; 
And scarce to the Angel utter'dst thus thy plaint: 

" O visions ill foreseen ! Better had I 
Lived ignorant of future ! so had borne 
My part of evil only, each day's lot 
Enough to bear; those now, that were dispensed 
The burden of many ages, on me light 
At once, by my foreknowledge gaining birth 
Abortive, to torment me, ere their being, 
With thought that they must be. Let no man seek 770 
Henceforth to be foretold what shall befall 
Him or his children; evil he may be sure, 
Which neither his foreknowing can prevent, 
And he the future evil shall no less 
In apprehension than in substance feel 
Grievous to bear. But that care now is past; 
Man is not whom to warn; those few escaped 
Famine and anguish will at last consume, 
Wandering that watery desert. I had hope, 
When violence was ceased and war on Earth, 780 

All would have then gone well, peace would have crowned 



BOOK XL 337 

With length of happy days the race of Man ; 
But I was far deceived, for now I see 
Peace to corrupt no less than war to waste. 
How comes it thus? Unfold, Celestial Guide, 
And whether here the race of Man will end." 

To whom thus Michael : " Those, whom last thou saw'st 
In triumph and luxurious wealth, are they 
First seen in acts of prowess eminent 
And great exploits, but of true virtue void ; 790 

Who, having spilt much blood, and done much waste, 
Subduing nations, and achieved thereby 
Fame in the world, high titles, and rich prey, 
Shall change their course to pleasure, ease, and sloth, 
Surfeit, and lust, till wantonness and pride 
Raise out of friendship hostile deeds in peace. 
The conquered also, and enslaved by war, 
Shall, with their freedom lost, all virtue lose, 
And fear of God, from whom their piety feigned 
In sharp contest of battle found no aid 800 

Against invaders; therefore, cooled in zeal, 
Thenceforth shall practise how to live secure, 
Worldly or dissolute, on what their lords 
Shall leave them to enjoy; for the Earth shall bear 
More than enough, that temperance may be tried. 
So all shall turn degenerate, all depraved, 
Justice and temperance, truth and faith, forgot; 
One man except, the only son of light 
In a dark age, against example good, 
Against allurement, custom, and a world 810 

Offended. Fearless of reproach and scorn, 
Or violence, he of their wicked ways 
Shall them admonish, and before them set 
The paths of righteousness, how much more safe 

p. L. 22 



PARADISE LOST. 

And full of peace, denouncing wrath to come 

On their impenitence ; and shall return 

Of them derided, but of God observed 

The one just man alive ; by his command 

Shall build a wondrous ark, as thou beheld'st, 

To save himself and household from amidst 820 

A world devote to universal wrack. 

No sooner he, with them of man and beast 

Select for life, shall in the ark be lodged, 

And sheltered round, but all the cataracts 

Of Heaven set open on the Earth shall pour 

Rain day and night; all fountains of the deep, 

Broke up, shall heave the ocean to usurp 

Beyond all bounds, till inundation rise 

Above the highest hills. *Then shall this Mount 

Of Paradise by might of waves be moved 830 

Out of his place, pushed by the horned flood, 

With all his verdure spoiled, and trees adrift, 

Down the great river to the opening Gulf, 

And there take root, an island salt and bare, 

The haunt of seals, and ores, and sea-mews' clang:Ji 

To teach thee that God attributes to place 

No sanctity, if none be thither brought 

By men who there frequent or therein dweil. 

And now what further shall ensue behold." 

He looked, and saw the ark hull on the flood, 840 
Which now abated; for the clouds were fled, 
Driven by a keen north-wind, that, blowing dry, 
Wrinkled the face of deluge, as decayed; 
And the clear sun on his wide watery glass 
Gazed hot, and of the fresh wave largely drew, 
As after thirst; which made their flowing shrink 
From standing lake to tripping ebb, that stole 



BOOK XI. 



339 



With soft foot towards the deep, who now had stopt 

His sluices, as the heaven his windows shut. 

The ark no more now floats, but seems on ground, 850 

Fast on the top of some high mountain fixed. 

And now the tops of hills as rocks appear ; 

With clamour thence the rapid currents drive 

Towards the retreating sea their furious tide. 

Forthwith from out the ark a raven flies, 

And after him, the surer messenger, 

A dove, sent forth once and again to spy 

Green tree or ground whereon his foot may light; 

The second time returning, in his bill 

An olive-leaf he brings, pacific sign. 860 

Anon dry ground appears, and from his ark 

The ancient sire descends, with all his train; 

Then, with uplifted hands and eyes devout, 

Grateful to Heaven, over his head beholds 

A dewy cloud, and in the cloud a bow 

Conspicuous with three listed colours gay, 

Betokening peace from God, and covenant new. 

Whereat the heart of Adam, erst so sad, 

Greatly rejoiced, and thus his joy broke forth : 

"O thou, who future things canst represent 870 

As present, Heavenly Instructor, I revive 
At this last sight, assured that Man shall live, 
With all the creatures, and their seed preserve. 
Far less I now lament for one whole world 
Of wicked sons destroyed, than I rejoice 
For one man found so perfect and so just, 
That God vouchsafes to raise another world 
From him, and all his anger to forget. 
But say, what mean those coloured streaks in Heaven, 
Distended as the brow of God appeased? 880 

22 2 



340 PARADISE LOST. 

Or serve they as a flowery verge to bind 
The fluid skirts of that same watery cloud, 
Lest it again dissolve and shower the Earth?" 

To whom the Archangel : " Dextrously thou aim'st. 
So willingly doth God remit his ire, 
Though late repenting him of Man depraved; 
Grieved at his heart, when looking down he saw 
The whole Earth filled with violence, and all flesh 
Corrupting each their way yet, those removed, 
Such grace shall one just man find in his sight, 890 

That he relents, not to blot out mankind, 
And makes a covenant never to destroy 
The Earth again by flood, nor let the sea 
Surpass his bounds, nor rain to drown the world 
With man therein or beast ; but, when he brings 
Over the Earth a cloud, will therein set 
His triple-coloured bow, whereon to look 
And call to mind his covenant. Day and night, 
Seed-time and harvest, heat and hoary frost, 
.Shall hold their course, tall- fire purges 11 .thiaa&^new, 900 
iBoth Heaven and Earth, wherein the just shall dwell." 



BOOK XII. 



THE ARGUMENT. 

The Angel Michael continues, from the Flood, to relate what shall 
succeed; then, in the mention of Abraham, conies by degrees to explain 
who that Seed of the Woman shall be which was promised Adam and 
Eve in the Fall; his incarnation, death, resurrection, and ascension; 
the state of the Church till his second coming. Adam, greatly satisfied 
and recomforted by these relations and promises, descends the hill with 
Michael; wakens Eve, who all this while had slept, but with gentle 
dreams composed to quietness of mind and submission. Michael in 
either hand leads them out of Paradise, the fiery sword waving behind 
them, and the Cherubim taking their stations to guard the place. 



BOOK XII. 



AS one who in his journey bates at noon, 
Though bent on speed, so here the Archangel paused 
Betwixt the world destroyed and world restored, 
If Adam aught perhaps might interpose ; 
Then, with transition sweet, new speech resumes: 

"Thus thou hast seen one world begin and end, 
And Man as from a second stock proceed. 
Much thou hast yet to see; but I perceive 
Thy mortal sight to fail; objects divine 
Must needs impair and weary human sense: 10 

Henceforth what is to come I will relate; 
Thou, therefore, give due audience, and attend. 

"This second source of men, while yet but few, 
And while the dread of judgment past remains 
Fresh in their minds, fearing the Deity, 
With some regard to what is just and right 
Shall lead their lives, and multiply apace, 
Labouring the soil, and reaping plenteous crop, 
Corn, wine, and oil; and, from the herd or flock 
Oft sacrificing bullock, lamb, or kid, 20 

With large wine-offerings poured, and sacred feast, 
Shall spend their days in joy unblamed, and dwell 
Long time in peace, by families and tribes, 



344 PARADISE LOST. 

Under paternal rule; till one shall rise, 

Of proud, ambitious heart, who, not content 

With fair equality, fraternal state, 

Will arrogate dominion undeserved 

Over his brethren, and quite dispossess 

Concord and law of Nature from the Earth; 

Hunting (and men, not beasts, shall be his game) 30 

With war and hostile snare such as refuse 

Subjection to his empire tyrannous. 

A mighty hunter thence he shall be styled 

Before the Lord, as in despite of Heaven, 

Or from Heaven claiming second sovranty; 

And from rebellion shall derive his name, 

Though of rebellion others he accuse. 

He, with a crew, whom like ambition joins 

With him or under him to tyrannize, 

Marching from Eden towards the west, shall find 40 

The plain, wherein a black bituminous gurge 

Boils out from under ground, the mouth of Hell. 

Of brick, and of that stuff, they cast to build 

A city and tower, whose top may reach to Heaven; 

And get themselves a name, lest, far dispersed 

In foreign lands, their memory be lost, 

Regardless whether good or evil fame. 

But God, who oft descends to visit men 

Unseen, and through their habitations walks 

To mark their doings, them beholding soon, 50 

Comes down to see their city, ere the tower 

Obstruct Heaven-towers, and in derision sets 

Upon their tongues a various spirit, to rase 

Quite out their native language, and, instead, 

To sow a jangling noise of words unknown. 

Forthwith a hideous gabble rises loud 



BOOK xii. 345 

Among the builders; each to other calls, 

Not understood, till hoarse, and all in rage, 

As mocked they storm. Great laughter was in Heaven, 

And looking down, to see the hubbub strange 60 

And hear the din ; thus was the building left 

Ridiculous, and the work Confusion named." 

Whereto thus Adam, fatherly displeased : 
"O execrable son, so to aspire 
Above his brethren, to himself assuming 
Authority usurped, from God not given ! 
He gave us only over beast, fish, fowl, 
Dominion absolute; that right we hold 
By his donation : but man over men 
He made not lord; such title to himself 70 

Reserving, human left from human free. 
But this usurper his encroachment proud 
Stays not on Man; to God his tower intends 
Siege and defiance. Wretched man ! what food 
Will he convey up thither, to sustain 
Himself and his rash army, where thin air 
Above the clouds will pine his entrails gross, 
And famish him of breath, if not of bread?" 

To whom thus Michael: "Justly thou abhorr'st 
That son, who on the quiet state of men So 

Such trouble brought, affecting to subdue 
Rational liberty; yet know withal, 
Since thy original lapse, true liberty 
Is lost, which always with right reason dwells 
Twinned, and from her hath no dividual being. 
Reason in Man obscured, or not obeyed, 
Immediately inordinate desires 
And upstart passions catch the government 
From reason, and to servitude reduce 



346 PARADISE LOST. 

Man, till then free. Therefore, since he permits 90 

Within himself unworthy powers to reign 

Over free reason, God, in judgment just, 

Subjects him from without to violent lords, 

Who oft as undeservedly enthral 

His outward freedom : tyranny must be, 

Though to the tyrant thereby no excuse. 

Yet sometimes nations will decline so low 

From virtue, which is reason, that no wrong, 

But justice, and some fatal curse annexed, 

Deprives them of their outward liberty, 100 

Their inward lost : witness the irreverent son 

Of him who built the ark, who, for the shame 

Done to his father, heard this heavy curse, 

Servant of servants, on his vicious race. 

Thus will this latter, as the former world, 

Still tend from bad to worse, till God at last, 

Wearied with their iniquities, withdraw 

His presence from among them, and avert 

His holy eyes; resolving from thenceforth 

To leave them to their own polluted ways, no 

And one peculiar nation to select 

From all the rest, of whom to be invoked 

A nation from one faithful man to spring. 

Him on this side Euphrates yet residing, 

Bred up in idol-worship Oh, that men 

(Canst thou believe?) should be so stupid grown, 

While yet the patriarch lived who scaped the Flood, 

As to forsake the living God, and fall 

To worship their own work in wood and stone 

For gods ! yet him God the Most High vouchsafes 120 

To call by vision from his father's house, 

His kindred, and false gods, into a land 



BOOK XII. 347 

Which he will show him, and from him will raise 

A mighty nation, and upon him shower 

His benediction so, that in his seed 

All nations shall be blest. He straight obeys; 

Not knowing to what land, yet firm believes. 

I see him, but thou canst not, with what faith 

He leaves his gods, his friends, and native soil, 

Ur of Chaldaea, passing now the ford 130 

To Haran ; after him a cumbrous train 

Of herds and flocks, and numerous servitude, 

Not wandering poor, but trusting all his wealth 

With God, who called him, in a land unknown. 

Canaan he now attains; I see his tents 

Pitched about Sechem, and the neighbouring plain 

Of Moreh ; there, by promise, he receives 

Gift to his progeny of all that land, 

From Hamath northward to the Desert south 

(Things by their names I call, though yet unnamed), 140 

From Hermon east to the great western sea; 

Mount Hermon, yonder sea, each place behold 

In prospect, as I point them : on the shore, 

Mount Carmel ; here, the double-founted stream, 

Jordan, true limit eastward; but his sons 

Shall dwell to Senir, that long ridge of hills. 

This ponder, that all nations of the Earth 

Shall in his seed be blessed. By that seed 

Is meant thy great Deliverer, who shall bruise 

The Serpent's head; whereof to thee anon 150 

Plainlier shall be revealed. This patriarch blest, 

Whom faithful Abraham due time shall call, 

A son, and of his son a grandchild, leaves, 

Like him in faith, in wisdom, and renown. 

The grandchild, with twelve sons increased, departs 



348 PARADISE LOST. 

From Canaan to a land hereafter called 

Egypt, divided by the river Nile; 

See where it flows, disgorging at seven mouths 

Into the sea. To sojourn in that land 

He comes, invited by a younger son 160 

In time of dearth, a son whose worthy deeds 

Raise him to be the second in that realm 

Of Pharaoh. There he dies, and leaves his race 

Growing into a nation, and now grown 

Suspected to a sequent king, who seeks 

To stop their overgrowth, as inmate guests 

Too numerous ; whence of guests he makes them slaves 

Inhospitably, and kills their infant males : 

Till, by two brethren (those two brethren call 

Moses and Aaron) sent from God to claim 170 

His people from enthralment, they return, 

With glory and spoil, back to their promised land. 

But first the lawless tyrant, who denies 

To know their God, or message to regard, 

Must be compelled by signs and judgments dire: 

To blood unshed the rivers must be turned; 

Frogs, lice, and flies must all his palace fill 

With loathed intrusion, and fill all the land; 

His cattle must of rot and murrain die ; 

Botches and blains must all his flesh emboss, 180 

And all his people; thunder mixed with hail, 

Hail mixed with fire, must rend the Egyptian sky, 

And wheel on the earth, devouring where it rolls; 

What it devours not, herb, or fruit, or grain, 

A darksome cloud of locusts swarming down 

Must eat, and on the ground leave nothing green; 

Darkness must overshadow all his bounds, 

Palpable darkness, and blot out three days; 



BOOK xii. 349 

Last, with one midnight-stroke, all the first-born 

Of Egypt must lie dead. Thus with ten wounds 150 

The river-dragon tamed at length submits 

To let his sojourners depart, and oft 

Humbles his stubborn heart, but still as ice 

More hardened after thaw; till, in his rage 

Pursuing whom he late dismissed, the sea 

Swallows him with his host, but them lets pass, 

As on dry land, between two crystal walls, 

Awed by the rod of Moses so to stand 

Divided, till his rescued gain their shore : 

Such wondrous power God to his Saint will lend, 200 

Though present in his Angel, who shall go 

Before them in a cloud, and pillar of fire 

By day a cloud, by night a pillar of fire 

To guide them in their journey, and remove 

Behind them, while the obdurate king pursues. 

All night he will pursue, but his approach 

Darkness defends between till morning-watch ; 

Then through the fiery pillar and the cloud 

God looking forth will trouble all his host, 

And craze their chariot-wheels : when, by command, 210 

Moses once more his potent rod extends 

Over the sea; the sea his rod obeys; 

On their embattled ranks the waves return, 

And overwhelm their war. The race elect 

Safe towards Canaan from the shore advance 

Through the wild Desert, not the readiest way; 

Lest, entering on the Canaanite alarmed, 

War terrify them inexpert, and fear 

Return them back to Egypt, choosing rather 

Inglorious life with servitude; for life 220 

To noble and ignoble is more sweet 



350 PARADISE LOST. 

Untrained in arms, where rashness leads not on. 

This also shall they gain by their delay 

In the wide wilderness : there they shall found 

Their government, and their great Senate choose 

Through the twelve tribes, to rule by laws ordained. 

God, from the mount of Sinai, whose grey top 

Shall tremble, he descending, will himself 

In thunder, lightning, and loud trumpet's sound, 

Ordain them laws; part, such as appertain 230 

To civil justice; part, religious rites 

Of sacrifice, informing them, by types 

And shadows, of that destined Seed to bruise 

The Serpent, by what means he shall achieve 

Mankind's deliverance. But the voice of God 

To mortal ear is dreadful; they beseech 

That Moses might report to them his will, 

And terror cease; he grants what they besought, 

Instructed that to God is no access 

Without Mediator, whose high office now 240 

Moses in figure bears, to introduce 

One greater, of whose day he shall foretell, 

And all the Prophets, in their age, the times 

Of great Messiah shall sing. Thus laws and rites 

Established, such delight hath God in men 

Obedient to his will, that he vouchsafes 

Among them to set up his tabernacle 

The Holy One with mortal men to dwell. 

By his prescript a sanctuary is framed 

Of cedar, overlaid with gold; therein 250 

An ark, and in the ark his testimony, 

The records of his covenant; over these 

A mercy-seat of gold, between the wings 

Of two bright Cherubim; before him burn 



BOOK XII. 351 

Seven lamps, as in a zodiac representing 

The heavenly fires. Over the tent a cloud 

Shall rest by day, a fiery gleam by night, 

Save when they journey; and at length they come, 

Conducted by his Angel, to the land 

Promised to Abraham and his seed. The rest 260 

Were long to tell : how many battles fought ; 

How many kings destroyed, and kingdoms won; 

Or how the sun shall in mid-heaven stand still 

A day entire, and night's due course adjourn, 

Man's voice commanding, ' Sun, in Gibeon stand, 

And thou, Moon, in the vale of Aialon, 

Till Israel overcome ! ' so call the third 

From Abraham, son of Isaac, and from him 

His whole descent, who thus shall Canaan win." 

Here Adam interposed : " O sent from Heaven, 270 
Enlightener of my darkness, gracious things 
Thou hast revealed, those chiefly which concern 
Just Abraham and his seed. Now first I find 
Mine eyes true opening, and my heart much eased, 
Erewhile perplexed with thoughts what would become 
Of me and all mankind ; but now I see 
His day, in whom all nations shall be blest, 
Favour unmerited by me, who sought 
Forbidden knowledge by forbidden means. 
This yet I apprehend not, why to those 280 

Among whom God will deign to dwell on Earth 
So many and so various laws are given : 
So many laws argue so many sins 
Among them; how can God with such reside?" 

To whom thus Michael : " Doubt not but that sin 
Will reign among them, as of thee begot ; 
And therefore was law given them, to evince 



352 PARADISE LOST. 

Their natural pravity, by stirring up 

Sin against law to fight; that, when they see 

Law can discover sin, but not remove, 290 

Save by those shadowy expiations weak. 

The blood of bulls and goats, they may conclude 

Some blood more precious must be paid for Man, 

Just for unjust, that in such righteousness, 

To them by faith imputed, they may find 

Justification towards God, and peace 

Of conscience, which the law by ceremonies 

Cannot appease, nor man the moral part 

Perform, and not performing cannot live. 

So law appears imperfect, and but given 300 

With purpose to resign them, in full time, 

Up to a better covenant, disciplined 

From shadowy types to truth, from flesh to spirit, 

From imposition of strict laws to free 

Acceptance of large grace, from servile fear 

To filial, works of law to works of faith. 

And therefore shall not Moses, though of God 

Highly beloved, being but the minister 

Of law, his people into Canaan lead; 

But Joshua, whom the Gentiles Jesus call, 310 

His name and office bearing, who shall quell 

The adversary Serpent, and bring back 

Through the world's wilderness long-wandered Man 

Safe to eternal Paradise of rest. 

Meanwhile they, in their earthly Canaan placed, 

Long time shall dwell and prosper, but when sins 

National interrupt their public peace, 

Provoking God to raise them enemies 

From whom as oft he saves them penitent, 

By Judges first, then under Kings ; of whom 320 



BOOK xii. 353 

The second, both for piety renowned 
And puissant deeds, a promise shall receive 
Irrevocable, that his regal throne 
For ever shall endure. The like shall sing 
All Prophecy that of the royal stock 
Of David (so I name this king) shall rise 
A Son, the Woman's Seed to thee foretold, 
Foretold to Abraham, as in whom shall trust 
All nations, and to kings foretold, of kings 
! The last, for of his reign shall be no end. 330 

 But first a long succession must ensue ; 
And his next son, for wealth and wisdom famed, 
The clouded ark of God, till then in tents 
Wandering, shall in a glorious temple enshrine. 
Such follow him as shall be registered 
Part good, part bad ; of bad the longer scroll ; 
Whose foul idolatries and other faults, 
Heaped to the popular sum, will so incense 
God, as to leave them, and expose their land, 
Their city, his temple, and his holy ark, 340 

With all his sacred things, a scorn and prey 
To that proud city, whose high walls thou saw'st 
Left in confusion, Babylon thence called. 
There in captivity he lets them dwell 
The space of seventy years; then brings them back, 
Remembering mercy, and his covenant sworn 
To David, stablished as the days of Heaven. 
Returned from Babylon by leave of kings, 
Their lords, whom God disposed, the house of God 
They first re-edify, and for a while 350 

In mean estate live moderate, till, grown 
In wealth and multitude, factious they grow. 
But first among the priests dissension springs, 



354 PARADISE LOST. 

Men who attend the altar, and should most 

Endeavour peace; their strife pollution brings 

Upon the temple itself; at last they seize 

The sceptre, and regard not David's sons; 

Then lose it to a stranger, that the true 

Anointed King Messiah might be born 

Barred of his right. Yet at his birth a star, 360 

Unseen before in Heaven, proclaims him come, 

And guides the eastern sages, who inquire 

His place, to offer incense, myrrh, and gold : 

His place of birth a solemn Angel tells 

To simple shepherds, keeping watch by night; 

They gladly thither haste, and by a quire 

Of squadroned Angels hear his carol sung. 

A Virgin is his mother, but his Sire 

The Power of the Most High. He shall ascend 

The throne hereditary, and bound his reign 370 

With Earth's wide bounds, his glory with the Heavens." 

He ceased, discerning Adam with such joy 
Surcharged as had, like grief, been dewed in tears, 
Without the vent of words ; which these he breathed : 

"O prophet of glad tidings, finisher 
Of utmost hope ! now clear I understand 
What oft my steadiest thoughts have searched in vain; 
Why our great Expectation should be called 
The Seed of Woman. Virgin Mother, hail ! 
High in the love of Heaven, yet from my loins 380 

Thou shalt proceed, and from thy womb the Son 
Of God Most High; so God with Man unites. 
Needs must the Serpent now his capital bruise 
Expect with mortal pain : say where and when 
Their fight, what stroke shall bruise the Victor's heel." 

To whom thus Michael : " Dream not of their fight 



BOOK xii. 355 

As of a duel, or the local wounds 

Of head or heel. Not therefore joins the Son 

Manhood to Godhead, with more strength to foil 

Thy enemy; nor so is overcome 390 

Satan, whose fall from Heaven, a deadlier bruise, 

Disabled not to give thee thy death's wound; 

Which he who comes thy Saviour shall recure, 

Not by destroying Satan, but his works 

In thee and in thy seed. Nor can this be, 

But by fulfilling that which thou didst want, 

Obedience to the law of God, imposed 

On penalty of death, and suffering death, 

The penalty to thy transgression due, 

And due to theirs which out of thine will grow : 400 

So only can high justice rest appaid. 

The law of God exact he shall fulfil 

Both by obedience and by love, though love 

Alone fulfil the law; thy punishment 

He shall endure, by coming in the flesh 

To a reproachful life and cursed death, 

Proclaiming life to all who shall believe 

In his redemption, and that his obedience 

Imputed becomes theirs by faith his merits 

To save them, not their own, though legal, works. 410 

For this he shall live hated, be blasphemed, 

Seized on by force, judged, and to death condemned, 

A shameful and accursed, nailed to the cross 

By his own nation, slain for bringing life; 

But to the cross he nails thy enemies, 

The law that is against thee, and the sins 

Of all mankind, with him there crucified, 

Never to hurt them more who rightly trust 

In this his satisfaction. So he dies, 

232 



356 PARADISE LOST. 

But soon revives; Death over him no power 420 

Shall long usurp; ere the third dawning light 

Return, the stars of morn shall see him rise 

Out of his grave, fresh as the dawning light, 

Thy ransom paid, which Man from Death redeems, 

His death for Man as many as offered life 

Neglect not, and the benefit embrace 

By faith not void of works. This godlike act 

Annuls thy doom, the death thou shouldst have died, 

In sin for ever lost from life; this act 

Shall bruise the head of Satan, crush his strength, 430 

Defeating Sin and Death, his two main arms, 

And fix far deeper in his head their stings 

Than temporal death shall bruise the Victor's heel, 

Or theirs whom he redeems a death like sleep, 

A gentle wafting to immortal life. 

Nor after resurrection shall he stay 

Longer on Earth than certain times to appear 

To his disciples, men who in his life 

Still followed him ; to them shall leave in charge 

To teach all nations what of him they learned 440 

And his salvation, them who shall believe 

Baptizing in the profluent stream the sign 

Of washing them from guilt of sin to life 

Pure, and in mind prepared, if so befall, 

For death like that which the Redeemer died. 

All nations they shall teach; for from that day 

Not only to the sons of Abraham's loins 

Salvation shall be preached, but to the sons 

Of Abraham's faith wherever through the world ; 

So in his seed all nations shall be blest. 450 

Then to the Heaven of Heavens he shall ascend 

With victory, triumphing through the air 



BOOK xii. 357 

Over his foes and thine; there shall surprise 

The Serpent, Prince of air, and drag in chains 

Through all his realm, and there confounded leave; 

Then enter into glory, and resume 

His seat at God's right hand, exalted high 

Above all names in Heaven; and thence shall come, 

When this world's dissolution shall be ripe, 

With glory and power, to judge both quick and dead 460 

To judge the unfaithful dead, but to reward 

His faithful, and receive them into bliss, 

Whether in Heaven or Earth; for then the Earth 

Shall all be Paradise, far happier place 

Than this of Eden, and far happier days." 

So spake the Archangel Michael ; then paused, 
As at the world's great period ; and our Sire, 
Replete with joy and wonder, thus replied : 

" O Goodness infinite, Goodness immense ! 
That all this good of evil shall produce, 470 

And evil turn to good; more wonderful 
Than that which by creation first brought forth 
Light out of darkness ! . Full of doubt I stand, 
Whether I should repent me now of sin 
By me done and occasioned, or rejoice 
Much more, that much more good thereof shall spring; 
To God more glory, more good-will to men 
From God, and over wrath grace shall abound. 
But say, if our Deliverer up to Heaven 
Must reascend, what will betide the few, 480 

His faithful, left among the unfaithful herd, 
The enemies of truth. Who then shall guide 
His people, who defend? Will they not deal 
Worse with his followers than with him they dealt?" 

" Be sure they will," said the Angel ; " but from Heaven 



358 PARADISE LOST. 

He to his own a Comforter will send, 

The promise of the Father, who shall dwell, 

His Spirit, within them, and the law of faith, 

Working through love, upon their hearts shall write, 

To guide them in all truth, and also arm 490 

With spiritual armour, able to resist 

Satan's assaults, and quench his fiery darts; 

What man can do against them not afraid, 

Though to the death; against such cruelties 

With inward consolations recompensed, 

And oft supported so as shall amaze 

Their proudest persecutors. For the Spirit, 

Poured first on his Apostles, whom he sends 

To evangelize the nations, then on all 

Baptized, shall them with wondrous gifts endue 500 

To speak all tongues, and do all miracles, 

As did their Lord before them. Thus they win 

Great numbers of each nation to receive 

With joy the tidings brought from Heaven : at length 

Their ministry performed, and race well run, 

Their doctrine and their story written left, 

They die; but in their room, as they forewarn, 

Wolves shall succeed for teachers, grievous wolves, 

Who all the sacred mysteries of Heaven 

To their own vile advantages shall turn 510 

Of lucre and ambition, and the truth 

With superstitions and traditions taint, 

Left only in those written records pure, 

Though not but by the Spirit understood. 

Then shall they seek to avail themselves of names, 

Places, and titles, and with these to join 

Secular power, though feigning still to act 

By spiritual; to themselves appropriating 



BOOK xii. 359 

The Spirit of God, promised alike and given 

To all believers; and, from that pretence, 520 

Spiritual laws by carnal power shall force 

On every conscience, laws which none shall find 

Left them enrolled, or what the Spirit within 

Shall on the heart engrave. What will they then, 

But force the Spirit of Grace itself, and bind 

His consort, Liberty? what but unbuild 

His living temples, built by faith to stand, 

Their own faith, not another's? for, on Earth, 

Who against faith and conscience can be heard 

Infallible ? Yet many will presume : 530 

Whence heavy persecution shall arise 

On all who in the worship persevere 

Of Spirit and Truth; the rest, far greater part, 

Will deem in outward rites and specious forms 

Religion satisfied; Truth shall retire 

Bestuck with slanderous darts, and works of faith 

Rarely be found. So shall the world go on, 

To good malignant, to bad men benign, 

Under her own weight groaning till the day 

Appear of respiration to the just, 540 

And vengeance to the wicked, at return 

Of Him so lately promised to thy aid, 

The Woman's Seed obscurely then foretold, 

Now amplier known thy Saviour and thy Lord ; 

Last in the clouds from Heaven to be revealed 

In glory of the Father, to dissolve 

Satan with his perverted world ; then raise 

From the conflagrant mass, purged and refined, 

New Heavens, new Earth, ages of endless date, 

Founded in righteousness and peace and love, 550 

To bring forth fruits, joy and eternal bliss." 



360 PARADISE LOST. 

He ended ; and thus Adam last replied : 
"How soon hath thy prediction, Seer blest, 
Measured this transient world, the race of time, 
Till time stand fixed ! Beyond is all abyss, 
Eternity, whose end no eye can reach. 
Greatly instructed I shall hence depart, 
Greatly in peace of thought, and have my fill 
Of knowledge, what this vessel can contain ; 
Beyond which was my folly to aspire. 560 

Henceforth I learn that to obey is best, 
And love with fear the only God, to walk 
As in his presence, ever to observe 
His providence, and on him sole depend, 
Merciful over all his works, with good 
Still overcoming evil, and by small 
Accomplishing great things, by things deemed weak 
Subverting worldly-strong, and worldly-wise 
By simply meek; that suffering for truth's sake 
Is fortitude to highest victory, r; 

And, to the faithful, death the gate of life; 
Taught this by his example whom I now 
Acknowledge my Redeemer ever blest" 

To whom thus also the Angel last replied: 
"This having learned, thou hast attained the sum 
Of wisdom ; hope no higher, though all the stars 
Thou knew'st by name, and all the ethereal powers, 
All secrets of the deep, all Nature's works, 
Or works of God in Heaven, air, Earth, or sea, 
And all the riches of this world enjoy'dst, 580 

And all the rule, one empire. Only add 
Deeds to thy knowledge answerable; add faith, 
Add virtue, patience, temperance; add love, 
By name to come called charity, the soul 



BOOK XII. 361 

all the rest : then wilt them not be loth 
To leave this Paradise, but shalt possess 
A Paradise within thee, happier far. 

^Eet us descend now, therefore, from this top 
Of speculation ; for the hour precise 
Exacts our parting hence ; and, see ! the guards, 590 

By me encamped on yonder hill, expect 
Their motion, at whose front a flaming sword, 
In signal of remove, waves fiercely round. 
We may no longer stay: go, waken Eve; 
Her also I with gentle dreams have calmed, 
Portending good, and all her spirits composed 
To meek submission : thou, at season fit, 
Let her with thee partake what thou hast heard; 
Chiefly what may concern her faith to know, 
The great deliverance by her seed to come 600 

(For by the Woman's Seed) on all mankind; 
That ye may live, which will be many days, 
Both in one faith unanimous ; though sad 
With cause for evils past, yet much more cheered 
With meditation on the happy end." 

He ended, and they both descend the hill. 
Descended, Adam to the bower where Eve 
Lay sleeping ran before, but found her waked; 
And thus with words not sad she him received : 

"Whence thou return'st, and whither went'st, I know; 610 
For God is also in sleep, and dreams advise, 
Which he hath sent propitious, some great good 
Presaging, since with sorrow and heart's distress 
Wearied I fell asleep. But now lead on; 
In me is no delay; with thee to go 

JIs to stay here; without thee here to stay 

v ] Is to go hence unwilling ; thou to me 



362 PARADISE LOST. 

Art all things under Heaven, all places thou, 

Who for my wilful crime art banished hence. 

This further consolation yet secure 620 

I carry hence : though all by me is lost, 

Such favour I unworthy am vouchsafed, 

By me the Promised Seed shall all restore." 

So spake our mother Eve, and Adam heard 
Well pleased, but answered not; for now too nigh 
The Archangel stood, and from the other hill 
To their fixed station, all in bright array, 
The Cherubim descended; on the ground 
Gliding meteorous, as evening mist 

Risen from a river o'er the marish glides, 630 

And gathers ground fast at the labourer's heel 
Homeward returning. High in front advanced, 
The brandished sword of God before them blazed, 
Fierce as a comet; which with torrid heat, 
And vapour as the Libyan air adust, 
Began to parch that temperate clime; whereat 
In either hand the hastening angel caught 
Our lingering parents, and to the eastern gate 
Led them direct, and down the cliff as fast 
To the subjected plain; then disappeared. 640 

They, looking back, all the eastern side beheld 
Of Paradise, so late their happy seat, 
Waved over by that flaming brand; the gate 
With dreadful faces thronged and fiery arms. 
Some natural tears they dropped, but wiped them soon; 
The world was all before them, where to choose 
Their place of rest, and Providence their guide. 
They, hand in hand, with wandering steps and slow, 
[Through Eden took their solitary way. 



NOTES 



NOTES 



COMMENDATORY VERSES. 

First printed in 1674. I number the lines of each poem for con- 
venience of reference. 

I. The Latin elegiacs : the author of these was Samuel Barrow, a 
Cambridge man of note. Born in 1625 he graduated from Trinity in 
1643, and afterwards attained to some celebrity in medicine. He was 
appointed Physician in Ordinary to Charles II. in August, 1660, and 
died in 1682. His Royalist sympathies evidently did not prevent him 
from being an admirer of Milton. Curiously enough, his poetic sum- 
mary of the contents of the Epic includes no direct reference to the 
Temptation and Fall of Man. He is most struck with the war in 
Heaven and Satan's expulsion. 

i. Amissam the masculine were more correct; cf. the title of 
Hogg's once well-known translation Paraphrasis Poetica in tria 
Johannis Miltoni Poemata, viz. Paradisum Amissum, Paradisuni 
Recuperatum, et Samsonem Agonisten (1690). 

9. pontum'y no doubt, the right reading. It may, however, be 
noted that both the second and third editions of Paradise Lost have 
portum (which Keightley retained, with what sense is not clear). 

15. futurum ; so the second and third editions, but many later 
texts print futtira. As the line stands it seems to mean (if we may 
reproduce the baldness of the original), * who could believe that there 
would be any one who would conceive hopes of these things ? ' i.e. be 
so ambitious. But probably the author intended futura (or wrote hoc), 

I ^ 38. These lines, nearly half the poem, allude to bk. vi. of 
P. Z.; see VI. 245327, 63470, 749 879- 

30. currus animes, the Cherubic chariot (vi. 750 56). 

39 42. Lauder placed these verses ironically on the title-page 
of his Essay (1750). 

42. Alluding to the Homeric "Battle of the Frogs and Mice," 
and the Vergilian "Culex." Cf. Dryden's lines on Milton. 

II. The English verses: the writer was Andrew Marvell (1620 
78), poet and politician. In 1657 he had been made assistant secretary 
to Milton while the latter still held office under the Council. At the 
Restoration he did Milton good service "acted vigorously in his 



366 PARADISE LOST. BOOK I. 

behalf and made a considerable party for him" (says Phillips, Memoir}. 
Marvell's poetry shows Milton's influence clearly ; see Lycidas, 40, note. 

9. Samson Agonistes had been published (1671). 

12. success, result, issue. 

26. pretend, claim falsely. 

37 40. See P. L. i. 13 15. A correspondent of Notes and Queries 
pointed out that " the bird" (39) meant is the bird of Paradise and that 
Marvell refers to the old notion, believed till the end of the last century, 
that it was footless: cf. "always keeps on wing." So in Lyly's play, 
Love's Metamorphosis, iv. i, the bird of Paradise is described as " that 
bird that liveth only by air, and dieth if she touch the earth " (Bond's 
Lyly, in. 319). Cf. too a complimentary poem (1647) to Fletcher 
(p. xlii. vol. i. in the Cambridge Beaumont and Fletcher] : 
"But thou art still that Bird of Paradise 
Which hath no feet and ever nobly flies." 

42. expense] some texts print expanse. 

43. See P. L. in. 3236. 

47 5- A sarcasm against Dryden, who, as the champion of 
rhymed plays, had under the name of "Bayes" been satirised in 
Buckingham's Rehearsal (1671) an attack which he repaid with 
interest in Absalom and Achitophel. . The allusion comes naturally 
from Marvell, who had himself borrowed the title of The Rehearsal 
for his chief prose work, 7"he Rehearsal Transprosed, a long polemical 
pamphlet in two parts (167273), in which his opponent figures 
throughout as "Mr Bayes." Milton was thought to have helped him 
in writing Part I., but Marvell denies this in Part II. See Aitken's 
Marvell, "Poems," p. 209, and Birrell's Life, chap. v. Dryden (as 
we learn from Aubrey) on one of his visits to Milton asked per- 
mission to "put his Paradise Lost into a drama in rhyme. Mr Milton 
received him cordially, and told him he would give him leave to tag his 
verses" : the outcome being his opera The State of Innocence and Fall 
of Man, published in 1674, the very year in which, apparently, Marvell 
wrote these verses. Milton may have talked the matter over with 
Marvell (so Masson thinks) ; or, perhaps, it had become a piece of 
contemporary gossip among literary men. Either way, the reference 
here is not to be mistaken. 

49. fancies. Keightley faces, points, the tagged laces used to tie 
parts of the dress, especially the breeches ; mentioned often in 
Shakespeare. 

51, 52. the mode, the fashion of rhyming. He means that he 
would use the word praise rather than the weaker term commend, 
had he not to find a rhyme with offend. 



NOTES. 367 



THE VERSE. 

i. rime; the older and more correct spelling of rhyme. 

10. Cf. the similar appeal to the example of Italian writers in the 
Preface to S. A. Italian works in blank verse (versi sciolti) which 
illustrate what Milton says in both places are : Trissino's tragedy 
Sofonisba, written about 1514, and his heroic poem Italia Liberata, 
published 1548 (cf. Johnson's Life of M. ad Jin.) ; Ruccelai's Rosmunda 
(1516), modelled on Sofonisba', Tasso's poem on the Creation; and 
Alamanni's didactic work La Coltivazione (1546). The influence of 
Italian poetry on Milton is seen also in the free ( ' Apolelymenos ') 
measures of the choruses of Samson Agonistes, and in Lycidas. 

"Among the Spanish poets, Mr Bowie mentions Francisco de 
Aldana, who translated the Epistles of Ovid into Spanish blank verse ; 
and Gonsalvo Perez, who, in like manner, translated the Odyssey of 
Homer" (Todd). 

n, 12. Scarcely pleasant reading for Dryden who had defended 
rhyme, and whose rhymed dramas were appearing in quick succession. 
We have, I believe, a similar hit at him in the Preface to *$". A. In 
the Preface to his Juvenal Dryden retorted that whatever might be 
Milton's "alleged" reasons for "the abolishing of rhyme," the real 
reason was "that rhyme was not his talent." 

20. Practically it was quite true that Paradise Lost was the first 
great English poem, of a non-dramatic type, written in blank verse, 
though Surrey had used a rhymeless measure in his translation of the 
second (1557) and fourth (1548) books of the ALneid cf. Ascham's 
Schoolmaster (1570), " The noble Lord Th' Earle of Surrey, first of all 
English men, in translating the fourth booke of Virgill...auoyded the 
fault of Ryming" (Bonn's ed., p. 217). There are also some blank verse 
pieces by Nicholas Grimald in Tottel's Miscellany (1557) e.g. "The 
Death of Zoroas," Arber's ed., pp. 120 23, and "Ciceroes death," 
pp. 12325. And Gascoigne's Steele Glas (1576) is " written without 
rime," as he notes in the " Epistle Dedicatorie " (Arber, p. 45). But 
these works, though interesting to the student, have no great intrinsic 
merit, and Milton's claim is substantially unimpeachable. The next 
long epic after Paradise Lost in blank verse was Phillips' Cider (1706), 
an imitation of the Georgics ; and Thomson (Autumn) in addressing 
Phillips says : 

' ' the second thou 

Who nobly durst in rhyme-unfettered verse 
With British freedom sing the British song " ; 

an obvious allusion to Milton (whom Thomson imitates constantly) 
and this Preface. 



368 PARADISE LOST. BOOK I. 



BOOK I. 

Abbreviations : 

M. = Milton, or Milton's poetry, as distinguished from his prose. 

P. W. Milton's prose-works (in " Bohn's Standard Library"). 

P. R. = Paradise Regained. 

S.A. = Samson Agonist 'es. 

Nat. Ode = Ode On the Morning of Chris? s Nativity. 
Other books of Paradise Lost are indicated by Roman numerals. 

i 6. Like Homer and Vergil he indicates the theme of his poem 
at the outset. Cf. the beginning of Paradise Regained : 
" I, who erewhile the happy Garden sung 
By one man's disobedience lost, now sing 
Recovered Paradise to all mankind, 
By one man's firm obedience fully tried 
Through all temptation, and the Tempter foiled 
In all his wiles, defeated and repulsed, 
And Eden raised in the waste Wilderness." 
2. mortal, deadly the late Lat. use of mortalis. 
4. Eden = Paradise, one greater Man, the Messiah ; Romans v. 1 9. 
6 1 6. The invocation of the Muse is an epic convention ; like 
Dante and Tasso, M. follows therein Homer and Vergil. The signifi- 
cance lies in his choice of a power to be addressed : not one of the 
Nine Muses to whom a Greek or Roman poet would have appealed, but 
the Muse of sacred song, the Heavenly power which inspired Moses on 
Sinai, and David on Zion, and the other prophets of Israel. Twice he 
speaks of great singers as "taught by the Heavenly Muse" (in. 19, 
Comus, 515), and in VII. i 4 he gives her the name "Urania," 'the 
Heavenly.' Book vii. i 39, where, having completed half his task, 
the poet petitions the Muse afresh, should be compared with this 
passage. 

6. Perhaps secret ~Lrt.. secretns, 'apart, retired'; cf. n. 891. 

7. Oreb, or. ..Sinai. M. may be referring to the two occasions on 
which Moses received a Divine communication (i) when the Lord, 
appeared to him in a burning bush, Exod. iii. ; (2) when he was given 
the Law, Exod. xix. xxxi. Myself, I believe that only the latter is 
intended, and that M., contrasting Exod. xix. 20 with Dent. iv. 10, 
does not decide whether the mountain where Moses received the Law 






NOTES. 369 



should be called "Oreb or Sinai." The accounts can be harmonised 
easily : Horeb was the whole range, Sinai its lower part. Why in P. L. 
(cf. xi. 74) M. prefers Oreb to Horeb, I do not know: in the Cambridge 
MSS. is the entry: "the golden calfe, or the massacre in Horeb." 

8. that shepherd, Moses, who " kept the flock of Jethro " on Horeb, 
Exod. iii. i. first taught; in Genesis i. Of course, M. drew largely on 
the Mosaic books of the Old Testament. 

9, 10. the Heavens, i.e. the sky and starry realms of this Universe. 
Chaos = "Q vast Abyss," 21 ; "the gloomy deep," 152. 

1012. Cf. in. 30, 31. 

Siloa s brook more familiar to us in the description "pool," through 
John ix. 7, 1 1 ; but Isaiah's words, of which M. may be thinking "the 
waters of Shiloah that go softly," viii. 6 imply that the waters of the 
pool overflowed into the garden below and so formed a streamlet, 
which would find its way into the Kidron. Josephus notes the 
abundant water of Siloa (which he always calls a spring, ^77777), 
Bellunijudaicuni) V. 4. i. The form Siloa illustrates Milton's dislike of 
sh ; see the note on 398. The Septuagint has ZiXwdt, the Vulgate Siloe. 

The reason, doubtless, why M. specially refers to Siloa is this. The 
Muses (says Hesiod, at the beginning of the Theogony) frequent "the 
dark-coloured spring (Aganippe)... and altar of Zeus." Imitating that 
passage in Lycidas, 15, (6, M. addresses the Muses as 

"Sisters of the sacred well, 

That from beneath the seat of Jove doth spring." 
He connects the spring with the altar cf.  Penseroso, 48 to show 
the sanctity of poetic inspiration. Here he takes Hesiod's thought, 
which he before presented in its classical dress, and gives it a Scriptural 
investiture : the result being a complete parallel between the classical 
Muses who haunt the spring that rises by the altar of Zeus, and the 
Heavenly Muse who haunts the spring that flows by the Temple ("the 
oracle") ot the Almighty. 

12. fast by, close by. Siloa was outside Jerusalem, in the valley 
that skirted Mt Moriah, on which stood the Temple, oracle, "thy 
holy oracle," Psalm xxviii. 2. 

14. The metaphor in "flight," "soar," is a iavourite with M. 
Cf. HI. 13, vn. 3, 4, ix. 45. no middle flight ', i.e. he will ascend to 
the highest Empyrean. 

14, 15. He hopes to be filled with a higher inspiration, so as to 
treat of higher things, than the classical poets whose inspiration came 
from the Muses of antiquity. the Aonian motmt^ Helicon, in 
Bceotia; sacred to the Muses whence their title Aonides. Pope 

P. L. 2A 



370 PARADISE LOST. BOOK I. 

calls them "Aonian maids" (Messiah], and Campbell, "Aonian 
Muses" (Pleasures of Hope). 

15. pursues, treats of; " in the sense of the Latin sequor. E noto 
fctum carmen sequar, Horace, Ars Poetica 240" (Keightley). 

16. This claim to novelty of theme recalls Comus, 43 45 : 

" I will tell you now 

What never yet was heard in tale or song, 
From old or modern bard, in hall or bower," 

i.e. "in prose or rhyme" (a phrase of Ariosto). Similar claims might 
be instanced in Vergil, Spenser, and other poets, e.g. Horace's carmina 
non prins  audita... canto (Od. III. i. 2 4). Dante says that he has seen 
in Paradise " things which whoso descendeth from up there hath nor 
knowledge nor power to retell," though he will try to (Paradise, i. 5, 6). 
rhyme, verse. 

17 26. Cf. the similar invocation of the Holy Spirit in P. K. I. 
8 17 : a higher power than the Muse addressed above. "There can 
be little doubt that Milton believed himself to be, in some real sense, an 
inspired man " (Masson). In The Reason of Church Government ', n., 
he says that a great poem can only be achieved through "devout prayer 
to that eternal Spirit, who can enrich with all utterance and knowledge " 
(P. W. ii. 481) ; and in The Christian Doctrine, I. 6, he explains that 
sometimes the Spirit means in Scripture " that impulse or voice of God 
by which the prophets were inspired" (P. W. iv. 152). 

19. for than know 1 st. Cf. Homer, Iliad II. 484, tffireTc v>v uoi, 
Mouacu... | vxets yap 6eal tyre, irdpeffTt re, fore re Trdvra ; and Theo- 
critus XXII. 116, etV 0ed, ffv yap olffda. 

20, 21. Cf. the account of the Creation in vn. 234, 235. In Genesis 
i. 2 the Heb. verb rendered "moved" in A.V. (ferebatur in the Vulgate) 
means either 'fluttered* (Luther has schwebete}, as in Deut. xxxii. n, 
where it is used of an eagle hovering ; or ' brooded ' (incubabat in Basil 
and others of the Latin Fathers), like a bird hatching eggs. Cf. Sir 
Thomas Browne, Religio, xxxm., "This is that gentle heat that brooded 
on the waters, and in six days hatched the world." 

21. dove-like. The allusion, I believe, is to the descent of the 
Holy Ghost "in a bodily shape like a dove" (Luke iii. 22) ; cf. P. R. 
* 3O> 83. This may be inferred from The Christian Doctrine, I. 6. 

22, 23. -what in me is dark illumine ; the thought is expanded in 
in. 4055- 

24. argument, subject = Lat. argumentum; cf. IX. 28. 

25. assert, vindicate. 

26. Cf. S. A. 293, 294: 

"Just are the ways of God, 
And justifiable to men " ; 



NOTES. 37 1 

the Scriptural reference being to passages like Ps. cxlv. 17 and Rev. 
xv. 3, "just and true are thy ways." Pope professed the same design ; 
cf. the Essay on Man, I. 15, 16 : 

"Laugh where we must, be candid where we can, 

But vindicate the ways of God to man." 
See also Gray's Progress of Poesy, 47. justify, i.e. " to men." 

29. grand, i.e. first, original. 

31, 32. i.e. transgress his will because of ("for") one restraint. 
Keightley makes for one restraint qualify what follows 'lords of the 
world (cf. ix. 658), but for a single restraint.' 

33. Cf. Iliad i. 8. 

36. what time, at the time when, Lat. quo tempore. " What time 
I am afraid, I will trust in thee," Psalm Ivi. 3. So in Comtts, 291, 
Lycidas, 28. 

39. peers, equals, Lat. pares ; cf. Lyddas, 9. 

40. See Isaiah xiv. 12 15. 

45. flaming', cf. Luke x. 18, " And he said unto them, I beheld 
Satan as lightning fall from heaven." the ethereal sky, the Empyrean. 

46. rutn = L,a.i. ruina, 'falling 5 ; see ill. 258, note. 
combustion, utter destruction. 

47. there', in "the bottomless pit" (vi. 866 see note). 

48. in adamantine chains. Cf. 2 Pet. ii. 4, "if God spared not the 
angels that sinned, but cast them down to hell, and delivered them 
into chains of darkness" (see 72); also Jude 6, Rev. xx. i, i. See 
II. 169, 183, 196, III. 82. 

50. nine, traditionally a significant number, being a multiple of 
three (see 619). Their fall from Heaven lasted nine days (vi. 871), as 
did that of the Titans in Hesiod. Dante students will remember the 
great significance that is attached to the number nine in the Vita 
Nuova. 

55. pain, physical suffering. Cf. 125, 147, 336 ; the point is 
emphasised by Milton (and lost if we interpret pain=- 'punishment'). 
Later, M. shows how the fallen angels first became sensible of pain 
through their sin (see vi. 327, note). 

56. baleful, full of woe. 

57. witnessed, showed, testified to. 

58. Scan obdiirate, as always in M. ; cf. VI. 790. 

59. The original editions have^f ngels kenn. Throughout the volume 
the apostrophe indicative of the genitive was omitted (as often happened 
then) : hence Angels may have stood also for Angel's or Angels' (cf. 754). 
Some modern texts print Angel's ken, making ken a noun. But M. 
uses ken as a verb (v. 265, xi. 396), and I prefer to take it so here 

24-2 



372 PARADISE LOST. BOOK I. 

with the sense, 'as far as angels see.' Cf. 2 Henry VL ill. ^. 101, 
" As far as I could ken thy chalky cliffs." 

60. dismal '; a much more poetic word then. 

61. "Of all the articles, of which the dreadful scenery of Milton's 
Hell consists, Scripture furnished him only with a Lake of Fire and 
Brimstone" (Cowper). See n. 575, 576, note. 

63. no light, i.e. there was. It was a popular belief that the flames 
of Hell gave no light (Keightley). Cf. Herrick's Noble Numbers : 
"The fire of Hell this strange condition hath, 
To burn, not shine (as learned Basil saith).' 1 

darkness visible  an obvious oxymoron (see 692). What M. means is 
not absolute darkness ('pitch darkness,' as we say), for then the 
"sights of woe" would have been invisible but the gloom which half 
conceals and half reveals objects, and itself (to borrow Pope's words) 
"strikes the sense no less than light." The Dnnciad, iv. i 4, is an apt 
parody. Mr Beeching reminds us of Job x. 22. 

66, 67. Doubtless from Euripides, Troades 68 1, 682, ipoi yap ou3' 
8 iraffi XeiTTcrai Ssorots | ^vveffriv cirls ('to me even hope, which all 
mortals have, is lost'). Probably too there is an echo of Dante's 
famous words "All hope abandon, ye who enter here" placed over 
the gates of Hell, Inferno, ill. 9. 

68. urges, afflicts, plies Lat. urgere cf. "exercise," n. 89. 

72. utter darkness ; again in ill. 16, v. 614. utter > outer. 

74, 75. He makes the distance of Hell from the Empyrean = three 
times the distance of the Earth ("the centre ") from the "utmost pole" 
of the globe or Universe (i.e. that point in the surface of the globe 
which is nearest to the Empyrean). The calculation is suggested by 
lliadvm. 16, &neid. 577 79. 

79 8 1. Beelzebub ; seen. 299, note. 

82. Satan = ' adversary ': a name first given to him when he 
rebelled: his "former name" being thenceforth heard no more (v. 658, 
659). It is not, I think, clear whether this "former name " was ' ' Lucifer " 
(cf. vn. 131 33), or some other title which, like the titles of the other 
rebels, was utterly blotted out (cf. 36163, vi. 37680). I believe, 
however, that M. means us to understand that both "Lucifer" and 
"Satan" were later names, given after the rebellion. 

84, 85. A double allusion to Isaiah xiv. 12, "how art thou fallen from 
heaven," and JEneid 1 1. 274, 275, quantum mutatus ab illo  Hectare. 

86. didst ; grammar requires did', the sense implies 'thou.' 

8- 91. Cf. v. 676 78, where Satan says to Beelzebub that 
they had ever been wont to share each other's thought and "were 
one." To Beelzebub he first hinted his purpose to rebel (v. 673). 



NOTES. 



373 



87. if he, i.e. if than beest he ; the sentence is not completed 
(auacohtthon}. M. often uses this abrupt style to suggest the speaker's 
agitation ; cf. v. 30 et seq. 

91, 92. into what. ..from what', cf. V. 543 and P. R. u. 30, 31 
An imitation perhaps of Gk. ofo9... r y as in Sophocles, Trachinia 
994, t'eptDi o'iav o'iwv...xo.piv, 'what a return (i.e. how poor) for what 
sacrifices' (i.e. how great); and Electro, 751, ol' tpya dpdvas ola ay- 

Xfofl KCLK&. 

93. Cf. the account of the battle in m. 392, 393, vi. 83638. 

94. Satan's defiant spirit recalls the stubborn attitude of Prometheus 
towards Zeus in ^Eschylus's play. 

97. fixed mind; cf.  Penseroso, 4, The Faerie Quecne, iv. 7. 16, 
"Yet nothing could my fixed mind remove" (change). 

98. high disdain. A common phrase with our old poets Spenser 
(The Faerie Queene, r. r. 19), Sylvester and others; taken from the 
alto sdegno of Italian writers (Todd). "High" is a favourite epithet 
of Dante, especially in abstract phrases like "the high virtue" (falta 
virth], God's high decree " (alto fato di Dio], ' ' the high Providence " 
(falta Prowidenza]-, see the Inferno, xxm. 55, xxvi. 82, xxxi. no- 
Purgatono, xxvi. 72, xxx. 40, 142; Paradise, I. 106, xxvn. 61. 

104. dubious, because the battle lasted for three days (bk. vi.). 

105. shook his throne. A boastful exaggeration; cf. 114 and see 
vi. 833, 834. field, battle (u. 768); cf. Lat. campus. The Second Ed. 
has the note of interrogation at the end of the line. 

107. study, pursuit of; like Lat. studium, it often meant 'en- 
deavour,' as in King Lear, I. i. 279; cf. xi. 577. 

10811. The Second Ed. has at the end of 108 a colon of 109 
a note of interrogation ; and in 1 1 1 a full stop after me. This punctua- 
tion, variously altered in many texts, I retain. Some editors remove 
the interrogation in 109, treating the line as a relative clause, as though 
Satan said : 'I retain my wilt (106), my hate (107), my courage (108), 
and all other qualities in me that cannot be overcome.' This gives 
good sense. But the interrogative form may, I think, be interpreted 
thus: 'to retain one's hate, one's courage etc., is not that to be still 
unsubdued : in what else but this lies the test of being not over- 
come?' In one of the last of Tonson's editions (1738), I find line 
109 bracketed, i.e. treated as a parenthesis. 

what... else ; to be taken together ; cf. 683. 

no. Regarding 109 as parenthetical, I take that glory to refer 
back to 108 : never' (says Satan) shall the Victor extort from me the 
jlorv to him of my submission.' Some explain 'the glory (i.e. 
Satan s) of not being overcome' ; but does this suit " extort " ? 



374 PARADISE LOST. BOOK I. 

115. Scan ignomy ; see II. 207, note. 

116. by fate; important because Satan denies (v. 860 63) that the 
angels were created by the Almighty: they were, he says, self-begotten 
by their own " quickening power," at the time decreed by the course of 
fate. Fate, not the Almighty, he recognises as superior. 

gods, divine beings ; cf. v. 60, note. 

117. Can the fiery substance (see u. 139 42, 274, 275, notes) 
of their forms perish (" fail ")? Satan thinks not: Moloch and Belial 
are less certain (ir. 99, 146 54). 

120. successful hope, hope of success; so in Shakespeare often. 
Cf. "sterile curse" = the curse of sterility, Julius Ca-sar, . 2. 9. 

122. grand, great (like Fr. grand} ; cf. II. 507. 

123. triumphs', Dryden always accents the verb triumph ; cf. The 
Hind and the Panther, in. 566: 

"Who but the Swallow now triumphs alone? 

The canopy of heaven is all her own." 
See the Religio Laid, 56. 

124. tyranny. M. makes him use the most offensive word not 
"monarchy," as in 42, where the poet was speaking in his own person. 
See u. 59, note. 

128. throned powers ; Satan's followers in general ("throned" cf. 
360 merely suggesting their dignity) : not the particular Order of the 
Hierarchies called Thrones, since Satan is an Archangel. 

138. essences, beings. ) 

139. remains', singular, because "mind and spirit" form one 
idea. This is a common usage in Shakespeare ; cf. Troilus and 
Cressida, IV. 5. 170, "faith and troth... bids thee." See Lycidas, 7. 

141. though... glory extinct. Cf. 394, 395, and S. A. 738, 739. 
I think that these are absolute constructions, modelled perhaps on the 
Lat. ablative absolute ; but there may be an ellipse of the auxiliary 
verb, extinct, quenched (like a flame). 

144. of force, perforce; so IV. 813. 

148. suffice, satisfy = Lat. stifficere. 

149 52. Cf. The Christian Doctrine, I. 9, "They (evil angels) are 
sometimes permitted to wander throughout the whole earth, the air 
(cf. 430), and heaven itself, to execute the judgments of God." 

150. his business, the work he appoints for us to do. 

155. to undergo, i.e. so as to undergo (not dependent on avail, 153). 

158. doing or suffering, i.e. whether in an active or passive state; 
cf. the common antithesis Spav... TraQeiv, see II. 199, P. R. in. 194, 

195- 

167. if I fail not, if I am not mistaken, Lat. ni fallor. 



NOTES. 375 

1 70. his ministers, the good angels ; but, essentially, the expulsion 
of the rebels was due to the Messiah, "sole victor" (vi. 880). 

xyj -7. See vi. 858 79. laid, i.e. to rest, stilled; cf. P. R. 
iv. 429, and Tennyson, Margaret, "Your spirit is the calmed sea, 
Laid by the tumult of the fight," and Qtteen Mary, I. 5, "God lay the 
waves and strow the storms at sea." So sterncre (sEneidv. 763) and 
ponerein Lat.; cf. ponerefreta, Horace, Odes I. 3. 16. 

176. V=its; or he may be personifying "thunder." 

178. slip, let slip; cf. Macbeth, n. 3. 52, "I have almost slipped 
the hour." 

185. A reminiscence of Richard II. v. r. 5, 6: 

" Here let us rest, if this rebellious earth 
Have any resting for her true king's queen." 

186. afflicted, struck down, routed (Lat. afflictus}. powers, forces. 

187. offt'ndA... offenders, 'to strike at, harm' ; cf. vi. 465. 
191. Cf. vi. 787, "hope conceiving from despair." if not, i.e. 

if we may not gain reinforcement. 

197. as whom, as those whom, fables, the mythological stories 
of the classics; Milton generally speaks of them contemptuously as 
"fabulous." 

198. Earth-born, the Giants; like the Titans (with whom writers 
confused them much) they were reputed the offspring of Uranus an d_Ge 
(Earth); see 509, note, and 778. that warred; referring to the Giants 
only; the legend of their conflict with Zeus (or Jove) seerns to be due 
to the earlier revolt of the Titans against Uranus. 

199. Briareos or Typhon; the former (centumgeminus Briareus, 
sEn. vi. 287), being the son of Uranus, is meant to represent the Titans 
the latter, the Giants. The legends about both were conflicting. 
Scan Briareos, though classically the name is Brtdreus. 

or Typhon. Cf. Fairfax, Tasso, II. 91, "He looked like huge Tiphoius 
loos'd from hell." Typhon, or Typhoeus, is commonly described as 
a hundred-headed serpent-monster, who, trying to seize sovereignty 
over gods and men, was vanquished by Zeus with a thunderbolt and 
buried under ^itna. See II. 539. 

200. Tarsus, the capital of Cilicia ; M. alludes here to Pindar and 
.Eschylus who describe Typhon as living in "a Cilician den"; cf. 
Eschylus, Prometheus Vinctus 351 54, rbv yrjyevi] re Kihucluv otojropa | 
at>Tp<i)i'...Tv<puva ('the earth-born inhabitant of Cilician dens'), where 

seems to be quoting Pindar, Pyth. I. 17, [Typhon] rbv irore  
dptyev TroXvuvvjiov avrpov. So Pyth. VIII. 16, Tu0ws Kli. 
This Typhon is said to be not the same as the Egyptian Typhon 
of the Nativity Ode, 226, and of the wonderful allegory of Isis and 




376 PARADISE LOST. BOOK I. 

Osiris in the Areopagitica (P. W. n. 89); the latter Typhon being the 
Egyptian god Set. But M. either identifies them in the Nativity Ode, 
or else transfers to the Egyptian Typhon the description ("Typhon 
huge ending in snaky twine ") proper to his Greek namesake. See 
Osgood's Classical Mythology in Milton, pp. 83, 84. 

201. The Bibles of that time identified the Leviathan with the 
whale, and M. probably did so; but the Heb. livydthdn was used of 
any huge monster, e.g. the crocodile, Psalm Ixxiv. 14. 

202. ocean-stream ; Homer's poos (or Trorayuos) wv'tdvoio. 

203 208. Todd quotes a story to this effect from the Swedish 
writer Olaus Magnus, whose History of the Northern Nations had been 
Englished (1658). Evidently some remarkable 'traveller's tales' as to 
the size of whales were in circulation : Heylin, Cosmography (1682 ed.), 
tells us of 'Leviathans' four acres big (in. 191, 192). Cf. Milton's own 
description, vu. 412 16. 

-204. pilot, steersman (S. A. 198) ; or 'master of the vessel.' 
night-foundered, benighted; literally * plunged or sunk in night' (and 
so unable to continue his course). Cf. Counts, 483. 

206. i.e. with anchor fixed in his rind. Such inversions of the 
order of words are common in Shakespeare; cf. Richard II. in. i. 9. 
As a matter of natural history, whales have not "scaly rinds" ; but M. 
alludes to Job xli. 15 (where, however, the crocodile is meant). 

207. the lee, the sheltered side. 

208. invests ; in the Latin sense ' to wrap ' (investire). 

211. heaved, lifted ; cf. Germ, heben. To "heave the head" occurs 
in S. A. 197, Cotmis, 885, U Allegro, 145 ; Dryden borrowed it (St 
Cecilia's Day). 

221. rears, raises ; as often in Spenser and Shakespeare. 

226. incumbent, leaning, resting, on (Lat. incumbens). 

229. liquid fire', a Vergilian phrase; cf. Eclogue vi. 33. 

230 33. This notion of earthquakes being caused by the escape of 
winds from underground recurs in vi. 195 98, S. A. 1647, 1648. 

232. Pelorus, the north-east promontory of Sicily, now Cape Faro; 
near Etna, by whose volcanic action M. implies that it was affected. 

233 37. Editors compare ALncidm. 571 77. 

233. whose. The antecedent is Pelorus as well as ^Etna, the 
description that follows being applied to both. 

235. sublimed, kindled into pure flame. 

236. involved, wrapped in (Lat. involvere). 
239. Stygian fiood, the " fi ery gulf "(52). 

242. clime  here and in 297 the sense seems to be 'climate, tem- 
perature'; but in ii. 572, 'region, realm.' 



NOTES. 377 

-244. change for, take in exchange for. 

246. sovran ; the Italianised form used by M. 

248. i.e. they were his equals in reason, but not in pover. 

253. Cf. Horace's calum non aninium nmtant qui trans mare 
air runt (Epist. I. n. 27). 

254. A glance at the teaching of the Stoics (Thyer). its ; see 
IV. 813. Goldsmith probably remembered these lines when he wrote : 

" Still to ourselves in every place consign'd, 

Our own felicity we make or find " (77ie Traveller']. 
Compare also Hamlet's sentiment that "there is nothing either good 
or bad, but thinking makes it so " (n. 2. 255 57) ; where editors cite 
similar passages from Montaigne's Essays (i. 40) and Lyly, in illustra- 
tion of the Elizabethan love of aphorism. 

255. A reminiscence, I suppose, of A Midsummer- NighCs Dream, 
II. i. 243, "I'll follow thee and make a heaven of hell." Hartley 
Coleridge says, "One sinful wish would make a hell of heaven." For 
this conception of Hell as not a place, but a mental state, of punish- 
ment, see IV. 20 23 ; also xii. 587, note. Sir Thomas Browne writes, 
Religio Medici, Li., "every devil is an hell unto himself; he holds 
enough of torture in his own ubi" In Marlowe's Faust us, when the 
Doctor asks, "Where is the place that men call hell?", Mephistophilis 
replies (v. 119, 120) : 

"Hell hath no limits, nor is circumscribed 
In one self place ; for where we are is hell." 

257. all but less than = nearly equal to. The phrase is a combina- 
tion of only less than ' and * all but equal to ' (Beeching). 

259. i.e. in building Hell the Almighty has created a place such 
that he could never grudge Satan its possession. 

261 63. When William Lauder published in 1750 his infamous 
Essay on Milton, the object of which was to show that the poet had 
plagiarised from a number of obscure writers (mostly foreign scholars 
of the i6th and i7th cents.), he took these three lines, translated them 
into what he conceived to be Iambic verse, said that he had found 
them in the Adamtts Exul (1601) of Grotius, and printed them as a 
convincing proof of Milton's dishonesty. His version runs or limps 
thus : nam, me judice,  regnare dignitm est ambilu, etsi in Tartaro ; 
| alto prceesse Tartaro siquidem (sic) juvat,  ctzlis quam in ipsis servi 
obire mtinia. In 1752 he reprinted the Adamus in his Delecttis, but 
did not venture to interpolate his forgery. The mischief, however, had 
been done ; for Bishop Newton printed the lines in his notes on this 
passage as genuine, and remarked that M. had evidently ' translated ' 
them from Grotius. Of course, the fraud was eventually exposed. 



378 PARADISE LOST. BOOK I. 

Bishop Newton, whose own work in editing Paradise Lost was of 
signal merit, had no reason to suspect Lauder, and probably no 
opportunity of consulting the Adamus. 

263. Probably the germ of this famous line (varied in VI. 183, 184) 
is Homer, Od. xi. 488, where Achilles (in Hades) says that he would 
rather serve on earth as a poor man's slave, than reign over all the dead. 
Fletcher says of the fallen angels, "In Heaven they scorn'd to serve, so 
now in Hell they reign" ( The Purple Island ', vil. 10). 

266. oblivious, causing forgetfulness ; cf. II. 74. 

276, 277. Cf. VI. 108. edge^... acies, the front line of a fight. 

281. amazed, utterly confounded ; a far stronger word then ; cf. 313. 

282. pernicious, destructive, ruinous ; some, however, explain it 
'great,' 'excessive.' 

284 87. his... shield; see VI. 254 56. like the moon ; Spenser had 
appropriated the sun for this simile; cf. The Faerie Queene, n. 2. 21, 
" His sunbroad shield about his wrest (i.e. wrist) he bond." 

285. temper a thing tempered (cf. II. 813): abstract for concrete. 

288. optic glass ; apparently not an uncommon phrase for the tele- 
scope ; I find it in Giles Fletcher, Christ 's Victory on Earth, 60, and 
in Henry More, Song of the Soul: 

"The Opticke glasse has shown to sight 
The dissolution of these starrie crouds" 

(p. 212, Cambridge ed. 1647). Cf. "optic tube," in. 590 (borrowed 
by Thomson, Autumn}. Galileo did not invent the telescope, but he 
developed it : hence it is generally associated with his name; cf. Bacon, 
"those glasses (ilia perspicilla} discovered by the memorable efforts of 
Galileo," Novum Organon, xxxix. 

A Tuscan by birth, Galileo (cf. v. 261 63, note) passed the latter 
part of his life in, or near, Florence. M. saw him (1638 39); cf. the 
Areopagitica: "There (in Italy) it was that I found and visited the 
famous Galileo, grown old, a prisoner to the Inquisition, for thinking 
in astronomy otherwise than the Franciscan and Dominican licensers 
thought," P. W. II. 82. Another great Englishman who visited 
Galileo not long before M. (in 1636) was Hobbes. The poet would 
remember that, like himself, Galileo lost his sight (about 1638). See 
an article, " Galileo in the Val D'Arno," in The Monthly Review, 
April, 1907. 

289, 290. There is true pathos in the mention, here arid in 302 
304, of Italian scenes. M. is revisiting in memory places associated 
with what was, perhaps, the happiest period of his whole life, viz. his 
stay in Italy : "times when... I tasted bliss without alloy" (as he wrote 
in 1647, Letter). He always spoke of Italy with the deepest affection: 



NOTES. 379 

especially of Florence which he loved for its language (Letter, 1638), 
"its genius and taste" (Second Defence), and the friends whom he should 
ever remember with pleasure (vestri nunqiiam meminisse pigebit 
Epitaphium Damonis, 125). He was much courted there by men of 
letters, says his nephew (Life of M., 1694). 

Fesole, Fiesole, classical Fcesulce; a hill about three miles north-east 
of Florence. Valdarno, the valley of the river Arno, in which Florence 
lies. Here (290) M. has in mind Galileo's last residence at the villa 
called  Gioello ('the Gem') at Arcetri, on the left bank of the Arno, 
i.e. west of the main part of the city. Near this villa "an old tower is 
still pointed out as having once been his observatory" (Masson). There 
is a passage in one of Milton's Letters from Florence, in which he speaks 
of his "visiting with delight the stream of the Arno, and the hills of 
F^esohe" (P. W. 111.497). 

292. 293. his spear. ..the mast. I find the comparison twice in 
Fairfax's famous translation (1600) of Tasso's epic Jerusalem Delivered 
(briefly referred to in these Notes as "Fairfax, Tasso"); cf. in. 17, 
"Mast-great the spear was which the gallant bore," and VI. 39. 

293. Norwegian hills. Norway, of course, was a great timber- 
emporium : thence, says Hexham's Mercator (1636), "the high 
masts for shipping, the plankes and boords of Oak and firre trees 
are sent yeerely in great abundance into Germanie, Holland, France, 
England, Spayne, and other places" (i. 93). And Jonson says that the 
appearance of the tall-masted vessels of the Armada was as if "half of 
Norway with her fir trees came," Prince Henry's Barriers. See also 
Dryden, Annus Mirabilis, st. 143. 

294. ammiral, the chief vessel of a fleet, the flagship. 
296. marie, soil ; more correctly used of rich, moist earth. 
those, i.e. the well-known, famous (Lat. illi). 

298. Cf. VI. 214, and P. R. i. 116. 

299. nathless rQ. the less : A. S. nd=not. 

302. The comparison of a multitude to fallen autumnal leaves is 
found in Homer, Vergil, Dante, and other epic poets. Cf. Dryden 
(who has obviously recollected this passage), "Thick as the leaves in 
autumn strew the woods... the army stands," sEn. vi. 428. M. was 
himself at Florence in the autumn (September, 1638). The Italian 
allusion in 302 304 follows naturally on the other (288 90). 

303, 304. Vallombrosa, 'shady valley' ; about 18 miles from Florence. 
The name is applied not only to the valley itself, but to the wood-covered 
amphitheatre of hills rising therefrom. High up stands a monastery (now 
secularised) where M. was said to have spent some days (a tradition of 
which Wordsworth makes effective use in his "At Vallombrosa"), and 



380 PARADISE LOST. BOOK I. 

in the chapel an organ used to be shown as that on which M. played. 
The reference to the fallen leaves is appropriate, the approach to the 
monastery being through forests of chestnut and beech trees, deciduous 
species. Dean Stanley wrote, "inasmuch as the whole mountain is 
furrowed with streams, which gave to the place its original name of 
fiellacqna, the leaves constantly falling on these streams, and almost 
choking their currents, give the exact picture" painted by M.: "an 
instance" (he added) "of the tenacity of Milton's memory in retaining, 
through all the vicissitudes of civil war, age, and blindness, the precise 
recollection of what he had seen in early youth " Notes and Queries, 
V. v. 306, XI. 488, 489. 

There is a good description of Vallombrosa in a once popular book 
of travel, Eustace's Classical Tour through Italy, vol. in. chap. 2. 
He says that the monastery was " at all times celebrated in the literary 
history of Italy" (Ariosto, for instance, mentioning it in terms of high 
eulogy) ; so that Milton's reference is really a touch of his literary 
allusiveness, as well as an echo of happy personal experience. Eustace 
also notes that the description in Paradise Lost, iv. 131 42, has been 
thought by some to be a recollection of the scenery at Vallombrosa. 

embower, form as it were bowers. 

sedge ; "in allusion to the Hebrew name of the Red Sea, Yam 
Sfif, i.e. Sea of Sedge, on account of the quantity of sea-weed in it " 
(Keightley). As the angels are afloat on waves (of fire), the simile is 
in the highest degree appropriate. 

305. The rising of the constellation Orion (at midsummer) and his 
setting (at the beginning of November) being attended with storms, the 
name became proverbial of rain and " fierce winds." Cf. AZneid 
I. 535, nimbosits Orion, IV. 52, aquosns Orion ; and Grotius, Adamus 
Exnl illic procellis ttim idus Orion furit. So Marlowe, Fanslus, in. 2, 
"Orion's drizzling look"; and Hey wood's Hierarchic, "Orion... 
riseth in the winter season, disturbing both earth and sea with showres 
and tempests " (ed. 1635, p. 177). 

armed; from JEneid III. 517, annatmnque aitro circumspicit 
Oriona. "After his death, Orion [the great hunter] was placed among 
the Stars where he appears as a giant with a girdle, sword... and club" 
(Class. Diet.}. 

306 ii. Exodus xiv. vexed; in the sense ('to disturb violently, 
to buffet') of Lat. vexare, as applied to a storm, e.g. in Vergil, 
Eclogue vi. 76, Horace, Odes II. 9. 3. Cf. "the still-vex'd Ber- 
moothes," The Tempest, I. i. 229; and Tennyson's Ulysses, line n. 
See n. 660, and P. R. iv. 416. 

307. Late Greek writers (cf. the Xlth Oration of Isocrates) speak 






NOTES. 381 

of an Egyptian kin^ Busiris, unknown to Homer and Hesiod, and not 
mentioned in Egyptian records. Some describe him as builder of 
Thebes. Legend said that he was slain by Hercules an event depicted 
often on vases. Why M. identifies him with the Pharaoh who perished 
in the Red Sea, no one has ever explained. Some editors say that M. 
follows Raleigh's History; but Raleigh expressly states that Busiris 
was "the first oppressor of the Israelites" (p. 204), and that after two 
intervening reigns came "Cenchres drowned in the Red Sea" (p. 197, 
1621 ed.). Cf. again p. 218, "through which (i.e. Red Sea) Moses 
past, and in which Pharaoh, otherwise called Cenchres, perished." 
Either M. follows some unknown authority, or he treats Busiris as 
a general title for the rulers of Egypt, like 'Pharaoh.' 

Memphian Egyptian ; cf. 694. The same use occurs in Sylvester ; 
cf. "The Memphian Sages then, and subtill Priests," where the margin 
has, "The Magicians of Egypt" (Grosart's ed., I. 187). He calls the 
Egyptians variously "Memphites," "Memphists," and " Memphians." 
Memphis was the ancient capital (before Thebes) of Egypt; founded 
by Menes (ist monarch of ist dynasty), and called Men nefer, 'the 
good station,' from its position at the apex of the Delta. 

chivalry, forces, as P. R. in. 344. In neither place need we limit 
it to 'cavalry' (with which chivalry is etymologically identical). 

308. perfidious ; because he had given the Israelites leave to go. 

309. "Israel dwelt... in the country of Goshen," Gen. xlvii. 27. 

311. broken-, cf. xn. 210. 

312. abject^ cast down. 

320. virtue, valour = Lat. virtus. 

321. the vales of Heaven. In v. 642 55 he describes the angels 
sleeping in Heaven, "among the trees of life." 

330. One of the earliest allusions to Paradise Lost seems to occur 
in Marvell's Satires ("Britannia and Raleigh," 1673 or 1674) : "Awake, 
arise from thy long blest repose ! " (Aitken's ed., p. 82). 

33 5 . nor did they not, i.e. and they did Lat neque non. 

337. For "obey A?" (Fr. obeir a), cf. Greene, Friar Bacon, ix. 142, 
" I charge thee to obey to Vandermast"; Troilusand Cressida, ill. i. 165, 
and The Ph&nix, 4, "To whose sound chaste wings obey." There is a 
single instance in the Bible Romans vi. 16. 

33843. Exod. x. 12 15. See the account of the ten Plagues 
in xn. 184 86. Amrairfs son, Moses ; see Exod. vi. 20. 

340. a pitchy cloud, dark as pitch ; the expression occurs in the 
deleted lines of Comus, between 356 and 357 ; cf. i Henry V2. II. 2. i, 2 : 
"The day begins to break, and night is fled, 
Whose pitchy mantle over-veil'd the earth." 



382 PARADISE LOST. BOOK I. 

341. warping^ working themselves, undulating, forward; the meta- 
phor of a ship. 

345. cope, roof, covering ; cf. iv. 992. 

351 55. Alluding to the invasions of Italy and the Roman empire 

*-by the Goths (as early as 248 A.D.); the Huns, notably under Attila, 

defeated at Chalons-sur-Marne, 451; and the Vandals. Genseric, or 

Gaiseric, the leader of the Vandals, crossed from Spain into Numidia, 

428, captured Carthage, 439, and built up an empire in Africa. 

Observe the effectiveness of the three similes whereby M. conveys 
an impression of the numbers of the angels. They are compared 
resting on the water, to fallen leaves (or floating sea-weed) : flying, to 
a cloud of locusts that "darkens" the land (Exodus x. 15): alighted, 
to a vast host that throngs a plain. Each aspect has its simile. 

353. Rhene, from Lat. Rhenns Rhine, and Danaw or Donau, the 
German form of Danube, were current forms in the ryth cent.; they are 
in Hexham's Mercator (1636) and Heylin's Cosmography (1682 ed.), 
perhaps the two most popular geographical works of the time. So 
"Rhenish wine "= Rhine wine, The Merchant of Venice^ I. 2. 104, 
Hamlet, I. 4. 10. 

355. beneath, south of; alluding to the Vandals. 

356. every ... each. A favourite variation with Milton; cf. Coinus, 
19, "Of every salt flood and each ebbing stream," and 311, "I know 
each land and every alley green." Etymologically ever^y ever- 
each. 

361 75. Again in vi. 379, 380, he tells us that the original 
names of the apostate angels were " Cancelled from Heaven and sacred 
memory." How then is he to describe them? He must give them 
some titles. So he adopts (see pp. 672 74) the view that they became 
the gods of heathenism, oriental and classical, and here, by anticipa- 
tion, uses those "new names" (365) which later ages assigned to 
them. 

363. Bentley thought that M. dictated Book', cf. Rev. iii. 5. A 
passage in The Christian Doctrine, I. 4, seems to make this probable : 
"mention is frequently made of those who are written among 
the living and of the book of life, but never of the book of 
death." 

37 37 1 ' & ee Romans i. 23. 

372. religions, religious rites, full of pomp ; M. often expresses 
dislike of ceremony and ritual in worship (see xn. 534). 

376. who first, who last', rLva irpurov, rlva 8' tiffraTOv, Iliad V. 
703. The long list of the deities is intended as a counterpart to 
Homer's catalogue of the ships and Vergil's list of warriors. 



NOTES. 383 

381. Those who led astray "the chosen people" come first. 

382 91. Texts probably glanced at are: I Pet. v. 8; Ezek. vii. 20, 
xliii. 8; Exod. xxv. 22 ; i Kings xix. 15. For the setting up of altars 
to heathen gods inside the Temple, see Manasseh's reign, 2 Kings xxi. 

386. thundering-, " perhaps taken from Exodus xx., where Jehovah * 
thunders the Ten Commandments from Sinai" (Beeching). 

386, 387. The reference is to the golden images of Cherubim, with 
expanded wings, placed over the mercy-seat covering the ark in the 
Tabernacle. Cf. Psalm Ixxx. i. 

389. abominations ; the Bible word for idolatrous worship. 

391. affront '; commonly taken in its primary sense 'to con- 
front,' 'face' (Lat. ad+frons)d. Hamlet, in. r. 31; but ix. 328 
and P. R. ill. 161 make the ordinary sense, 'to insult,' more 
likely. 

392. Moloch; god of the Sun regarded as a destroying power; "the 
abomination of the children of Ammon," i Kings xi. 7; worshipped 
with human sacrifices, 2 Kings xxiii. 10, Ps. cvi. 37, 38. The name, 
better written 'Mokch,' means 'King' (cf. Amos v. 26, margin), 
and M. generally adds "King" (cf. n. 43, vi. 357). He comes 
"first" because "fiercest" (n. 44). With these lines, 39296, cf. 
the Nativity Ode, 205 10, where Warton pointed out Milton's 
probable obligation to Sandys. 

396. Sandys, whose Relation (1615) of his travels in Palestine was 
certainly known to Milton (see again xn. 143, 144, note), gives, no 
doubt, the picture of the idol handed down by Jewish tradition, and 
describes it as "of brasse, hauing the head of a Calfe, the rest of a 
kingly figure, with armes extended to receive the miserable sacrifice, 
seared to death with his burning embracements. For the Idol was 
hollow within, filled with fire. And least their lamentable shreeks 
should sad the hearts of their parents, the Priests of Molech did deafe 
their eares with the continual clang of trumpets and timbrels," Relation, 
p. 1 86 (ed. 1637). This sacrifice of children by fire was due to the 
notion that the fierce summer heat of the god would be allayed thereby 
(Sayce). 

396 99. Rabba, the capital of the Ammonites, " the city of waters" 
2 Sam. xii. 27: Argob, a district of the mountain range of Bashan 
Arnon, the boundary river between Moab and the Amorites: all E. 
of Jordan. Part of this territory (as Keightley notes) belonged to not 
the Ammonites, spite of their claim (Judg. xi. 13) but the Amorites. 

398. Basan ; the form used in the Septuagint, Vulgate, and 
Prayer-Book. M. always avoids sh cf. Hesebon, 408, Sittim, 413, 
Beersaba (Beersheba), in. 536, Silo (Shilo), S. A. 1674 ( a * in Sandys, 



384 PARADISE LOST. BOOK I. 

p. 201). It will generally be fotmd that he has the authority of either 
the Septuagint or Vulgate (or both) for his Scriptural proper names, 
where they differ in form from the Authorised Version. 

401 403. Solomon, persuaded by his wives (cf. 443 46), built 
"high places" to Moloch, Chemos and Astarte on the Mount of Olives 
(i Kings xi. 5 7) thence called the "mount of corruption " (2 Kings 
xxiii. 13), and later, the "mount of offence." These titles M. glances 
at here (403), and in 416, 443. 

401. by fraud, by deceit. 

402. his Umfle, i.e. of Moloch. 

404. The valley of Hinnom, lying S. and S.W. of Jerusalem, 
skirted the southern part of Olivet. Having been the scene of rites 
paid to Moloch, it was "defiled" (cf. 418) by Josiah (2 Kings xxiii. 10), 
and made the common refuse-place of Jerusalem. Previously it formed 
part of the royal gardens. Sandys says, " We descended into the valley 
of Gehinnon, which divideth the Mount Sion from the Mountaine of 
Offence.. .This valley is but streight (i.e. narrow) ; heretofore most de- 
lightful, planted with groves, and watered with fountains," Relation, 
p. 1 86. The grove of Hinnom is not directly mentioned in Scripture. 

405. Gehenna, hell ; the Greek form of Ge Hinnom, ' valley of 
Hinnom.' 

406. "Moloch and Chemos ('the abomination of Moab') are 
joined, i Kings xi. 7. And it was a natural transition from the god of 
the Ammonites to the god of their neighbours the Moabites" (Newton). 
Chemos (really the same deity as Moloch) was often identified with 
Baal-Peor (412). 

obscene, foul ; referring to the character of the rites with which he 
was worshipped, dread, i.e. object of dread. 

407 ii. Roughly, all the places here mentioned (of which the 
sites are known) lay in the territory assigned (Numb, xxxii.) to the 
tribe of Reuben a region fringing the east shore of the Dead Sea, 
bounded S. by the river Arnon, N. by Mt Nebo. It had belonged to 
the Moabites till it was won from them by the Amorites (Numb. xxi. 26). 

407. from Aroer to Nebo, i.e. trom S. to N. of the region. Aroer  
a small town on the bank of the Arnon ; ci. Tennyson, A Dream of 
Fair Women, "from Aroer on Arnon unto Minneth." Nebo, the 
mountain (forming part of the range of Abaritn) from whose summit, 
Pisgah, Moses saw the Promised Land (Deut. xxxii. 49, xxxiv. i). 

408. Hesebon, Heshbon, "the city of Sihon the king of the 
Amorites," Numb. xxi. 26. 

410. The germ of the line lies in Isaiah xvi. 8, "the vine of Sibmah" 
(and verse 9). "Several rock-cut wine-presses are to be seen here, 



NOTES. ' 385 

and these are probably the remains of the vineyard industry for 
which Sibmah was once so famous" (Murray's Palestine, p. 173); 
the "flowery dale" is now "quite barren and uncultivated." 

411. jAZ,mod.El-'Al, 'theHigh'j about  miles from Heshbon. 
the Asphaltic pool=ht Dead Sea; cf. Blount, Glossographia, " Asphal- 
tick of or belonging to the Dead Sea, or Lake called Asphaltites"; and 
Sandys' Relation, p. 141, "that cursed lake Asphaltites; so named of 
the Bitumen which it vomiteth." The bitumen or "asphaltus" (729) 
floating on its surface is called "slime" in Gen. xi. 3, or 'Jews' Pitch.' 
See X. 298, 561, 562, notes. Compare the description of the Dead Sea 
in The Talisman, chapter I. 

412 14. Peor, Baal-Peor. Sittim; see Numb. xxv. ; it was situ- 
ated "in the plains of Moab." to do...rites=lpa. pt&iv, sacra facere 
('to sacrifice'}', cf. Comus, 535, "Doing abhorred rites to Hecate." 
cost them woe, i.e. the plague wherein died "twenty and four thousand." 

In Milton's list (Cambridge MSS.) of possible Scriptural subjects for 
his great ppem occurs the entry : " Moabitides Num. 25 " ; and later a 
second entry: "Moabitides or Phineas, " with a very brief outline of 
the treatment of the theme. 

415 1 8. He means that in later times, under Solomon, the rites 
( = "orgies") of Chemos were introduced at Jerusalem, of scandal, 
i.e. of 'offence' or 'stumbling.' homicide', he received human sacrifice 
(39296). 

415. orgies", cf. Jonson, Hymenai (footnote), "opyia with the 
Greeks value the same that ceremonies with the Latins ; and imply all 
sorts of rites." enlarged, carried still further. 

419 21. bordering, i.e. Palestine, on the north, the brook, the 
Besor, "the river of Egypt." These limits comprise Canaan. 

422. Baalim. The supreme male deity of the Phoenician and 
Canaanitish nations was the Sun-god, Baal : worshipped in different 
places under different aspects and titles e.g. Baal-Berith, Baal-Zebub, 
Baal-Peor. The collective name of all these manifestations of the god 
was 'Baalim' (plural). So 'Ashtanrth' (plural) was the collective name 
of the different manifestations of the Moon-goddess Ashtorcth (sing.), 
the supreme female deity of these nations, and counterpart of Baal. 

4 2 3 2 5- Imitated by Pope, The Rape of the Lock, I. 69, 70 : 
"For Spirits, freed from mortal laws, with ease 

Assume what sexes and what shapes they please." 
Pope imitates Milton much often most wittily. 

See also vi. 35153. where M. says that spirits " limb themselves," 
as they like, and assume "colour, shape, or size," according to their 
pleasure. Sir Thomas Browne discusses curious beliefs concerning 
P. L. 2S 



386 PARADISE LOST. BOOK I. 

"mutation of sexes," in Vulgar Errors, in. xvii. essence 
"liquid texture" of spirits, vi. 348. 

428. in what shape they choose. See 789, 790. Satan takes several 
"shapes" in P. L. : e.g. in iv. 402, 403, he is first a lion (an allusion to 
i Peter v. 8), then a tiger. In works on demonology popular in the 
1 7th century evil spirits often appear in the shape of wild animals ; see 
the "Digression of Spirits" in Burton's Anatomy of Melancholy, i. ii. i. 2. 
Thus in the Faust-buck (1587), chap, xxni., numerous spirits are intro- 
duced to Faustus, each in the form of some animal ; see Dr Ward's 
Faustus, p. 141. 

429. dilated, expanded, obscure, dark. M. invests the angels 
with a radiance which they can lay aside. 

433. Cf. "living Dread," S. A. 1673, "living God" in Scripture. 

434 36. bowing... bowed. Sarcastic play on words. 

The punctuation of the original editions makes bowed the main 
verb, and sunk a participle. 

436. before; implying 'under the onslaught of; as if they 
scarcely awaited it. 

438 41. Astoreth, or Astarte, identical with the Assyrian 
Istar and Greek Aphrodite, was symbolised in the religion of 
Phoenicians by the planet Venus or the Moon : in the latter case she 
was represented as horned like the crescent moon. Cf. Selden, de Dis 
Syriis Lunam autem se ostendit Astarte, cum f route corniculata fuerit 
conspicua (1629 ed., p. 246). So M. regards her here and in the Nat. 
Ode, 200, "mooned Ashtaroth, Heaven's queen" a title due to her as 
Moon-goddess ("the queen of heaven," Jeremiah vii. 18). Cf. 
"Assyrian queen" (i.e. Istar), Comus, 1002. The name is cognate 
with Sanskrit tara or stara, Lat. stella, E. star. 

Sidon was the oldest, and for a time the chief, city of Phoenicia. 

443 46. See 401403, note, and cf. P. R. II. 169 71. large; 
"God gave Solomon... largeness of heart," i Kings iv. 29. One of the 
entries in the list of subjects in the Cambridge MSS. is "Salomon 
Gynsecocratumenus or Idolomargus." 

446 52. " In vain the Tyrian maids their wounded Thammuz 
mourn," Nat. Ode, 204. According to the legend, Thammuz, son of 
Cyneras, King of Byblus in Phoenicia, was slain by a boar in Lebanon ; 
but every year his blood flowed afresh, and he came to life again there 
being annual festivals in his honour at Byblus and elsewhere, first to 
lament his death, then to celebrate his revival. Thammuz, 'sun of 
life,' is the Greek Adonis (the god of the solar year), and the story sym- 
bolises the alternation of summer and winter. The notion of his blood 
flowing again was due to the reddening of the waters of the river Adonis 



NOTES. 387 

through the peculiar red mud brought down by spring torrents from the 
Lebanon heights. M. alludes to the story in ix. 440, Mansus, n, and 
Eikonoklastes, i (" let them who now mourn for him as for Thammuz, 
them who howl in their pulpits" where "him" refers to Charles I.). 
The story is given at some length in Sandys' Relation, p. 209. 

450, 451. smooth, smooth-flowing. Smooth was used similarly of 
the river Mincius in Lycidas, 86, but amplified to smooth- sliding, 
native, i.e. from the river's source, ran purple, i.e. with reddened waters. 

454 57. Ezekiel viii. 14. Probably the Jews owed this worship 
to their intercourse with the Phoenicians. 

457 62. " Behold, Dagon was fallen upon his face to the ground 
before the ark of the Lord ; and the head of Dagon and both the palms 
of his hands were cut off upon the threshold," i Sam. v. 4. Dagon, the 
national god of the Philistines. See Samson Agonistes, passim, and 
cf. an entry in the Cambridge MSS.: " Dagonalia. Jud. 16 "; the refer- 
ence being to Judges xvi. 23 30 (the events dramatised in S. A.). His 
worship seems to have been introduced from Babylonia, since cuneiform 
Assyrian inscriptions mention a god Dakan or Dagan, probably iden- 
tical with Dagon. The name has also been derived (i) from Heb. 
Dag, 'a fish,' (2) from the Heb. word for 'corn,' Dagon being the god 
also of agriculture. 

458. in earnest, with better reason than the mourners just men- 
tioned, captive ark ; see i Sam. v. 2. 

460. griinsel, threshold. 

463. downward fish ; a symbol that he was a "sea-idol" (S. A. 13), 
the Philistines themselves being a race who had come into Canaan 
over the sea (from Crete), and dwelt along the sea-coast. Cf. i Sam. 
v. 4, margin. Probably M. connected the name with Dag, *a fish.' 

464 66. He mentions the five chief cities of the Philistines, Ash- 
dod and Gaza (cf. S. A., passim) being the principal seats of the worship 
of Dagon. Azottis, the Greek form of Ashdod (Acts viii. 40) ; used in the 
Vulgate; Selden, de Dis Syriis (p. 262), says, In Azoto sive Asdodo... 
fanum celebre erat Dagonis. Ascalon Askelon ; so the Septuagint 
and Vulgate. Aharon = ~Eknon } as in the Vulgate, which also has 
Accaronitce the people of Ekron. These must have been current forms 
in the i;th century : cf. Sandys' Relation, p. 153, " Ten miles North of 
Ascalon along the shore stands Azotus : and eight miles beyond that 
Acharon, now places of no reckoning." Cf. also Scot, Discoverie, 1584, 
" Belzebub the god of Acharon" (vil. xiii.), and Heywood's Hierarchic, 
"Baalzebub, of the Accarronites," p. 40. Gaza, the modern Guzzeh; 
on the borders of the desert that separates Palestine from Egypt : hence 
"frontier bounds." 

252 



388 PARADISE LOST. BOOK I. 

46769. Rimmon, the Syrian deity of Damascus (2, Kings v. 18), 
which lay between the rivers Abana and Pharpar (2 Kings v. 12). 

M. rightly stresses the name Abbana. 

47 ,_ 7 6. a leper, Naaman (2 Kings v.). For the Syrian altar of 
Ahaz, see 2 Kings xvi. sottish, foolish. 

47682. Cf. the Nativity Ode, 21115. The religion of the 
Egyptians consisted in a pantheistic worship of nature that took 
animals for its symbols. Thus Osiris, their chief god, was worshipped 
under the symbol of a sacred bull, Apis ; cf. the Essay on Man, I. 64, 
"the dull ox. ..Is now a victim, and now Egypt's god." Of Isis, 
'goddess of the earth,' Herodotus says, "the statue of this goddess 
has the form of a woman but with horns like a cow " (Rawlinson, n. 73). 
Anubis again was represented with a jackal's head, which the Greeks 
and Romans changed to that of a dog (cf. Plato, Gorg. 482 B and Vergil 
Mn. viil. 698, latrator Anubis}. Orus (or fforus), 'path of the sun,' 
was their Sun-god. 

Milton seems to be fond of referring to Egyptian mythology, drawing 
mainly, it is said, on Plutarch's treatise of Isis and Osiris. Thus he 
introduces the story of Isis and Osiris in his beautiful allegory of the 
dismemberment of Truth (Areopagitica) ; cf. also the bitter gibe at 
Charles I.'s death-scene in Eikonoklastes, i ("that I should dare to tell 
abroad the secrets of their Egyptian Apis"), P. IV. I. 328. See also 
his De Idea Platonica, 2934. 

477. crew, a depreciatory word in Milton (except in L Allegro, 
38), being used often of Satan and his followers; cf. 51, 751. 
479. abused, deceived, deluded ; cf. Fr. abuser. 
48284. The worship by Israelites of the golden calf in the 
wilderness (Exod. xxxii.) is traced to the Egyptian cult of Apis. 
borrowed, i.e. from the Egyptians, whom they "spoiled," Exod. xii. 

48486. rebel king, Jeroboam, a rebel against Rehoboam (who 
succeeded Solomon) ; he " doubled " the sin because he " made two 
calves of gold," setting one in Bethel, the other in Dan (i Kings xii. 20, 
28, 29). With 486 cf. Psalm cvi. 20. 

^ 48789. Referring to the tenth plague, Exod. xii. See xn. 189, 
190. he passed, i.e. Israel. 

489. ' ' The Lord smote all the first-born in the land of Egypt. . .and 
all the first-born of cattle," Exod. xii. 29. bleating; their deity Ammon 
was worshipped under the form of a ram. 

490. Strictly, Belial was not the name of any god, but an abstract 
word meaning 'that which is without profit ' = worthlessness, wicked- 
ness : hence generally found in phrases like 'son (or man) of Belial' 



NOTES. 389 

(501, 502). Cf. Dryden, Absalom and Achitophel, 597, 598 : 
" During his office treason was no crime, 

The sons of Belial had a glorious time." 

It has been treated so in the Bible sometimes, but more often 
incorrectly as a proper name. M. makes Belial a type of effeminacy 
and lust (cf. P. R. II. 150), and rightly does not limit his worship to any 
particular place although, to gratify his own hostility to the Church 
(49396) and the court (497), he cannot refrain from indicating his 
opinion as to where Belial is most prevalent. Cf. P. R. n., where 
Satan, speaking to Belial, says (182, 183) : 

" Have we not seen, or by relation heard, 
In courts and regal chambers how thou lurk'st?" 

last; because "timorous and slothful " (n. 117). 

495. See i Samuel ii. 12 17. 

497. Charles II. was then on the throne. The Licenser might 
have been expected to raise objections to the line. 

49 8 5I2- Macaulay suggested that M. had in mind "those pests 
of London," the street bullies, known at different times under various 
slang names, e.g. "Hectors," "Mohawks," "who infested London by 
night, attacking foot-passengers and beating the watch " (Mark Patti- 
son, note on Pope's Satires, I. 71). 

502. flown, flushed ; the combination of the abstract word, " inso- 
lence," with the literal "wine," suggests the figure called zeugma. 

503 505. Gen. xix., Judg. xix. The First Ed. had : 

"when hospitable Dores 
Yielded thir Matrons to prevent worse rape." 

503. witness, i.e. let the streets bear witness, be a proof. 

506. prime, first, foremost. 

507. were long to tell. Cf. x. 469, xu. 261; an imitation of the 
Latin; cf. Lucretius, IV. 1170, cetera de genere hoc longum est, si dicere 
coner. Spenser has it in The Faerie Quecne, n. 7. 14, and Drayton, 
Polyolbion, xv. (Keightley). were; the subjunctive, rare now, but 
common in Elizabethan English (Abbott). 

508. 509. i.e. held (= considered) by Javan's descendants (the 
Greeks) to be gods, confessed later, admitted to be of later origin ; 
see Deuteronomy xxxii. 17. 

Javan, the son of Japhet ; see Genesis x. 2. He stands for the 
Greek race ; the name being the same word as "lav (older form 'Iduv), 
whence lonians, the section of the Greeks with whom the Hebrews 
were best acquainted through Phoenician trade. Cf. "isles of Javan" 
= isles of Greece, S. A. 715, 716; see Isaiah Ixvi. 19. See iv. 717, 
note. 



39 PARADISE LOST. BOOK I. 

509. Heaven and Earth, i.e. Uranus and Ge (or Gaia), whose 12 
sons, according to the ordinary mythology, were called Titans (see 198, 
note). One of them, Cronos ( = Saturn in Roman mythology), deposed 
his eldest brother (cf. 511, 512), and afterwards was himself expelled 
by his own son Zeus=Jove, whose mother was Rhea (cf. 512 14). 
In 510 M. uses Titan as a name for the eldest ("first-born") of the 12 
Titans. 

511. enormous, monstrous. 

514, 515. Ida, the mountain in Crete where Jove was born. In 
II Penseroso, 29, M. associates "Ida's inmost grove" with Saturn. 

515, 516. Olympus, a mountain range between Thessaly and Mace- 
donia; early Greek poets speak of it, literally, as being the abode of 
Zeus and the other deities; so Milton here and in vn. 7, x. 583, 584 
(note), snowy; "its chief summit is covered with perpetual snow" 
(Class. Diet.]: hence Homer's epithet vi06as. 

the middle air; an old theory of physics divided the air into three 
regions (aeris trina spatia, according to the Adamus Exul of Grotius), 
and M. refers to this view and means the middle region of the three. 
See Appendix, pp. 674 76. 

517. Delphian cliff; the seat of the famous oracle of Apollo; on 
the southern slope of Mt Parnassus. Keightley quotes from Sophocles, 
QLdipus Rex 463, AeX0i$ Trtrpa ; cf. " steep of Delphos " (with the same 
reference to Apollo), in the Nat. Ode, 1 78, and Gray's Progress of 'Poesy, 66. 

518. Dodona, in Epirus. There was an oracle of Zeus here. 
519,520. Doric land, Greece. According to the common tradition, 

Saturn came alone to Italy (" the Hesperian fields"). 

521. the Celtic, i.e. "fields" cf. Comus, 60, "Roving the Celtic 
and Iberian fields"; or he may be imitating Greek i] KeXriK?; (i.e. 
Xwpa or 777, * country ') : in either case he means France perhaps too 
Spain, utmost isles, e.g. Britain (cf. Vergil, Eel. I. 67, penitus toto 
divisos orbe Britannos) and ' ultima Thule.' 

523. damp, depressed ; cf. xr. 293. 

528. recollecting, re-collecting, getting back again ; cf. x. 471. 

532. "A clarion is a small shrill treble trumpet" (Hume). 

534. Azazel, from Leviticus xvi. 8, where the A.V. has "the scape- 
goat," while the margin has "Azazel," which the R.V. adopts. That 
the word was the title of some evil demon is now generally held ; and I 
suspect that in making him one of the fallen angels M. simply 
followed some tradition of the mediaeval demonologists. 

536. advanced, uplifted ; cf. V. 588. It was the term for raising a 
standard ; cf. Romeo and Juliet, V. 3. 96, "And death's pale flag is 
not advanced there." 



NOTES. 391 

538. emblazed emblazoned : a term from heraldry. Cf. v. 592. 
and 2 Henry VI. iv. 10. 76. The banner had rich devices portrayed 
on it. 

540. metal blowing ; an absolute construction. The music changes 
(cf. 551) when their spirits have been duly raised by the trumpet-notes. 

542. Heirs concave, the vaulted roof of Hell; cf. n. 635. 

543. reign, realm ; so "regency," v. 748. See u. 89496 (note), 



546. orient, lustrous, bright. 

547, 548. helms, helmets, serried, locked together, Fr. serrL 

54 9 62. Cf. vi. 63 68. Here M. is thinking of the description in 
Thucydides (v. 70) of the Spartans advancing at the battle of Mantinea 
virb avXyruv TroAAwi, "to the strains of many flute-players" (Keightley). 

55> 55 1 Tne " Dorian" is one of the 'authentic' modes in music ; 
Plato calls it "the true Hellenic mode," and "the strain of courage," 
avdpeia, in contrast to the effeminate "Lydian" mode (see U Allegro, 
136, note). It inspires "a moderate and settled temper in the listener," 
says Aristotle (Pol. viil. 5). In the Areopagitica M. speaks of music 
which is "grave and Doric," P. W. n. 73. Many old German chorales 
are written in this mode (Grove). In On Education M. dwells on the 
influence of music upon character, in a passage closely parallel to this 
(P. W. m. 476). The lines seem an expression of his own devotion to 
the same art and inspiration. 

to, to the sound of, Gk. vir6 ; cf. 561. 

mood mode, recorders, flutes. 

556. swage, assuage; lit. 'to make sweet,' Lat. sttavis. 

561. in silence ; cf. VI. 64. 

562. the burnt soil; see 228, 229. 

563. horrid', probably in the lit. sense 'bristling' (Lat. horridus], 
i.e. with spears etc. ; cf. u. 513 and vi. 82. 

567, 568. files, ranks; cf. vi. 339. traverse, across. 

573. i.e. since the creation of man,,0.rf hominem creatum : a Latin- 
ism often used by M. with after; cf. Comus, 48, "After the Tuscan 
mariners transformed." 

574. embodied, assembled, brought together. 

574> 575- i-e. any other army, compared with this host of angels, 
would be as absurdly inferior as an army of pygmies. 

that small infantry, i.e. the Pygmies (cf. 780), the fabulous little 
folk, of the height of a vvyfufj (13^ inches), whom Homer mentions, 
. III. 5. Sir Thomas Browne, not quite certain whether to believe in 
them, is sure of one thing that "if any such nation there were, yet it is 
ridiculous what men have delivered of them ; that they fight with cranes 



392 PARADISE LOST. BOOK I. 

upon the backs of rams or partridges " ( Vulgar Errors, IV. xi. ). Addison 
was " afraid " that M. meant a pun on " small infantry" 

576 87. Expanding the idea in 573 75, he takes the great cycles 
of heroic story Greek (576 79), British (579 81), mediaeval, whether 
French or Italian (582 87) and says that all the warriors and armies 
severally associated with these stories could bear no comparison with 
Satan's followers. 

577. Phlegra, "the old name of the peninsula of Pallene in Macedonia, 
vhere (according to ancient legend) the Giants were born, and where 
they were vanquished by the Gods. Cf. the Inferno, xiv. 58. 

578, 579- Greek legend, as embodied in epic or tragic verse, 
centres mainly round Thebes, Troy (Ilium), and Mycenae (the city of 
the Pelopidae). Thus in his first Elegy (45, 46) M. epitomises the chief 
themes of Greek tragedy sett mceret Pdopeia domus, sen nobilis 111,  
aut luit incestos aula Creontis avos (Creon was king of Thebes). Here 
he mentions only two of the cycles. By the "heroic race" that fought 
at Thebes he means (i) Polynices and his six companions whose exploit 
is told in ^Eschylus's play, Scptem contra Thebas', (2) their descendants, 
the Epigoni, who ten years later destroyed Thebes. The heroes of 
the story of Ilium are those whom the Iliad presents to us. There 
"auxiliar gods" take part, some helping the Trojans, some the Greeks. 

579 81. Cf. Milton's own account of his youthful studies: "hear 
me out now, readers, that I may tell ye whither my younger feet 
wandered ; I betook me among those lofty fables and romances, which 
recount in solemn cantos the deeds of knighthood," An Apology for Smec- 
tymnuus (P. W. in. 118). The interest of this reference to the legend 
of King Arthur is explained in the Introduction. M. discusses the story 
at some length in his History of Britain, and evidently had studied it 
closely. It had appealed to Dante. These lines are the reference 
in the Introduction to Marmion, where Scott is speaking of King 
Arthur : 

" The mightiest chiefs of British song 
Scorn'd not such legends to prolong: 
They gleam through Spenser's elfin dream, 
And mix in Milton's heavenly theme." 

580. in fable; an allusion, suggests Keightley, in particular to 
Geoffrey of Monmouth, who gives one of our earliest versions (1140) 
of the Arthurian legend. No doubt M. is thinking of Geoffrey whom 
he used extensively in his History; but there he often refers also to 
the Breton monk Nennius and to Gildas, yet earlier authorities than 
Geoffrey likewise to William of Malmesbury. "Fable" is his 
favourite term in the History for these old Chronicles. 



NOTES. 



393 



romance^, e.g. Malory's Morte Darthur, published by Caxton, 1485 
(the basis of Tennyson's Idylls of the King). 

Other's son, King Arthur, son of Uther Pendragon ; cf. Tennyson, 
Palace of Arty "mythic Uther's deeply-wounded son." In the Epi- 
taphium Damonis, 166 68, M. glances at the story of Arthur's birth. 

581. The division of Arthur's "fabulous paladins" (as Drummond 
calls them, Forth Feasting, 1617) into "British and Armoric" coincides 
with P. R. II. 360, "By Knights of Logres or of Lyones " : where Logres 
= Britain, more strictly England east of the river Severn ; and Lyones = 
Brittany (according to one theory), whence came Sir Tristram. Brittany 
"was first called Armorica from its situation on the Sea, as the word 
importeth in the old language of that people" (Heylyn, i. 167). 
Brittany is closely connected with the Arthurian legend. 

begirt with, surrounded by. Cf. Gray, The Bard, in. 

582 87. The names are associated with romances (mainly Italian) 
in prose or verse ; see Appendix, pp. 676 80. jousted, tilted. 

86. his peerage, the "douze pairs" (i.e. peers) or 12 "paladins" of 
France (P. R. III. 343) : the most famous being Roland, the Achilles 
or brave man, and Oliver, the Ulyssee or wise man, of the Old French 
epic poems and prose-romances which narrate the exploits of Charle- 
magne and his knights. fell', not literally true of Charlemagne himself; 
M. may use it as a strong word = ' was utterly vanquished.' 

587. Fontarabia, modern Fuenterrabia, a frontier fortress on the 
Bay of Biscay S. of Biarritz. Its position made it the scene of many 
encounters between the Spanish and the French. 

588. observed, obeyed. 

591. like a tower-, cf. Tennyson's Ode on the Duke of Wellington: 
" O falFn at length that tower of strength 

Which stood four-square to all the winds that blew ! " 
Vergil bids Dante not trouble about the surprise of the spirits in 
Purgatory at the sight of him : "Follow me and let the people talk; 
stand thou as a firm tower sta come torre Jirmd which never shakes 
its summit for blast of winds" (Purgatorio, V. 13 15). 

592. her; he personifies "form." 

59 6 99- The lines to which the Licenser for the Press took 
exception when the MS. of the poem was submitted to him. It was 
indeed somewhat early after the Civil War and Restoration to speak of 
"change." The Licenser, as Chaplain of the Archbishop of Canter- 
bury, might well have objected to Milton's attacks on the Church, 
e.g. in xn. 50737- Cf. iv. 193, note. 

597. eclipse; proverbially of evil omen, the precursor of trouble; 
see xi. 183, note, disastrous, boding disaster. 



394 PARADISE LOST. BOOK I. 

60 r. intrenched, cut into; cf. O. Fr. trencher, 'to cut.' 
603. considerate, considering, full of thought. Cf. Areopagitica, 
" let us be more considerate builders, more wise," P. W. II. 93. 

605. remorse, pity. passion', in the general sense ' deep feeling.' 

606. fellows of, partners in. 

609. amerced of , deprived of, lit. 'fined with the loss of.' 

613 15. scathed^ damaged. Whether lightning can be said to 
"singe" the top of a tree seems doubtful, blasted heath ; see Macbeth, 
I ' 3- 77- blasted, withered by the lightning. 

619. thrice, a conventional number ; cf. Ovid, Metamorphoses XI. 
419, ter conata loqut, ter fietibus ora rigavit. assayed, tried. 

624. event, issue, result, Lat. eventus ; so often in Milton and 
Shakespeare. 

632. Scan exile; cf. X. 484, Richard II . I. 3. 151. 

633. emptied Heaven ; a mere boast; see II. 692, note. 

634. self-raised', see II. 75 77. 

642. tempted... attempt. There are not a few of these jingling 
phrases in M. Cf. "beseeching or besieging," v. 869, "feats of war 
defeats," S. A. 1278. Generally he expresses sarcasm or contempt by 
them. The use of this figure of speech (paronomasia] is specially 
common in late Latin writers, see Mayor's note on Cicero's 2nd 
Philippic, xi. 13 and also in the Italian poets. Milton uses it in his 
Latin writings; cf. The Christian Doctrine, I. 2, " Natura natam se 
fatetur...etaww quid nisi ejfatum divinum omnipotentis cujuspiam 
numinis potest esse ? " Something similar is found in Hebrew. 

645. better part. Luke x, 43 ("Mary hath chosen that good 
part"). 

650 54. See II. 345 53,830 35, and x. 481, 482. The first hint 
of the design against mankind comes from Satan (cf. II. 379 et seq.}, 
though Beelzebub afterwards developes it (ll. 345 78). fame, report. 

660. peace is despaired, i.e. pax desperalur ; cf. vi. 495. 

662. understood, i.e. among themselves, and so secret. 

668. Like Roman soldiers applauding an oration of their general, 
by smiting their shields with their swords (Bentley). 

674. "It was the common opinion of chemists that metals were 
composed of sulphur and quicksilver" (Keightley). 

675. brigad; so the original editions here and in n. 532. 

676. pioner ; an Elizabethan form of pioneer. 

678. cast, form by throwing up the earth. Mammon, like "Belial," 
is not really a proper name, but an abstract word = 'wealth.' 

679. erected, lofty, elevated ( = Lat. erectus}. 

682. " And the street of the city was pure gold," Rev. xxi. 21. 



NOTES. 395 

684. vision beatific = Visio Beatified, the phrase used by Schoolmen 
to express "seeing" God (Matthew v. 8). Cf. ''blessed vision," v. 613, 
"happy-making sight," Ode on Time, 18. See III. 61, 62, note. 

685. men also, i.e. as well as the fallen angels. 

686. the centre ; probably the centre of the earth ; or the earth 
itself. 

688. Horace's atirum irrepertum et sic melius sitwn (Od. in. 

3- 49)- 

690. 'ribs, bars, large pieces, admire, wonder = Lat. admirari. 

692. precious bane', an oxymoron (see II. 252 57). 

694. Some interpret Babel Baby Ion; but why not the Tower of 
Babel (xn. 43 62) ? There is a reference to Babylon in 717. 

the works, i.e. the Pyramids ; cf. Ben Jonson's Masque, Prince 
Henry's Barriers, "And did the barbarous Memphian heaps out- 
climb." Memphian, Egyptian ; as in 307. 

697. and in an hour, i.e. is performed (from 699). 

698, 609. Cf. Pliny, speaking of the Great Pyramid, "it is said (see 
Herodotus n. 124), that in the building of it there were 366,000 men 
kept at worke twentie yeares " (Holland's Pliny, 1601, II. 577). 

702. sluiced, led by sluices ; cf. Tennyson, Arabian Nights. 

703. founded, melted ; it seems impossible to follow the Second 
Ed., which reads found out. 

704. severing, separating, bullion-dross, the scum rising from the 
bullion, i.e. the liquefied mass of unpurified gold. See v. 439 43, note. 

708. M. would be likely to understand the mechanism of the 
organ, his favourite instrument ; cf. xi. 558 63. 

710 17. Cf. Pope (imitating the passage), The Temple of Fame, 91, 
**The growing towers, like exhalations, rise"; and Tennyson, (Enone : 
"Hear me, for I will speak and build up all 
My sorrow with my song, as yonder walls [i.e. of Troy] 
Rose slowly to a music slowly breathed, 
A cloud that gather'd shape." 

Peck noted that Milton's lines read like an account of some Jacobean 
Masque (iv. 768, note), describing one of those elaborate structures 
of stage-architecture designed by Inigo Jones and brought on the scene 
by means of machinery, to the accompaniment of music. For instance, 
in Jonson's Entertainment at Theobalds the main scene represented " a 
glorious place, figuring the seat of the household gods... erected with 
columns and architrave, frieze and cornice." See XI. 205, 206, note. 

It should be remembered too that the classical architecture of the 
Renaissance, familiar to Milton through his visit to Italy, had come 
into vogue in this country. 



396 PARADISE LOST. BOOK I. 

712. symphonies, i.e. the harmonious strains of the instruments 
accompanying the voices ; see xi. 595, note. 

713 17. pilasters, square columns usually set within a wall and 
slightly projecting, architrave, the main or 'master' beam (apxr) + 
trabs] that rests immediately upon a row of pillars, the frieze coming 
just above, and the cornice projecting above the frieze. 

bossy sculptures, i.e. sculptures in relief. 

fretted gold, gold wrought with designs, patterns. 

718. Alcairo', he means Memphis, giving it the name of the later 
capital built (loth cent. A.D.) some few miles from the site of its prede- 
cessor. The form Alcairo (Arab. Al Kahirah, * the city of victory ') 
seems to have been current then ; compare Hexham's Mercator, 
" Memphis. ..is called at this day (1636) Cairo or Alcairo" (il. 427). 

720. Belus. Cf. Sandys' Relation (p. 207), " Belus Priscus, 
reputed a God, and honored with Temples; called Bel by the Assyrians, 
and Baal by the Hebrewes." The famous temple of Bel at Babylon 
(Herodotus I. 181 83), attributed to Semiramis, is described by 
Raleigh, History, p. 183 (1621 ed.). 

Serapis', there was a temple to him at Memphis, but more celebrated 
was that at Alexandria, called the Serapeum, to which the great library 
was attached. Serapis was identical with the Greek Hades, whose 
worship was introduced into Egypt by Ptolemy I., some of the 
attributes of Osiris being transferred to him. Serapis and Serapis are 
found ; the latter is more correct. 

723, 724. stood fixed, i.e. was now complete (Lat. stabat), having 
reached its appointed height, discover, reveal ; F. dccouvrir. 

725. Thyer quotes ampla spatia from Seneca's Hercules Furens in. 

727. pendent by subtle magic. " I always like this, it is mystical " 
Tennyson. (In Tennyson's Life by his son there is an Appendix, 
entitled " My Father's talk on Milton's Paradise Lost " ; it is the source 
of these criticisms by Tennyson, often conversational in form.) 

728. cresset, a kind of hanging lamp. 

729. naphtha and asphaltus', the former the liquid (for the lamps), 
the latter the solid substance (for the cressets). 

732. the architect. Masson thinks that Mammon is intended, M. 
identifying him with Mulciber (or Vulcan). But M. only says that 
Mammon discovered the gold out of which the fabric was made, and 
leaves us, I think, to infer from what follows that the architect was 
Vulcan or Mulciber in classical mythology the god of fire and all 
metal-work, and architect of the palaces of the gods (cf. 732 35). He 
was too famous to need mentioning by name. 

733. towered structure high. The order of the words a noun 



NOTES. 397 

placed between two qualifying words is a favourite with M. The 
idiom is Greek; in his note on Lycidas, 6, Mr Jerram quotes Hesiod, 
Theogony, 8n, 812, xdceos oi)56s d(rre-i0?7S, and Euripides, Phosnissa 
234, vi<f>6pooi> opos ip6v. Gray probably borrowed the device from 
Milton; cf. his Elegy ', 53, "Full many a gem of purest ray serene." 
See II. 615, 616, v. 5 (note). 

736. gave to rule. A Lat. idiom ; cf. sEneid, I. 65, 66, tibi divum 
pater.., mulcere deditflectus. So in III. 243, xi. 339. 

737. M. alludes to a mediaeval belief that the Heavenly beings 
were divided into Hierarchies and Orders ; see Appendix, pp. 680 82. 

73 8 > 739- his name... in... Greece. Hephaestus was " the god of fire 
as used in art, and master of all the arts which need the aid of fire, 
especially of working in metal." All the palaces in Olympus (the 
heaven of the classical gods) were built by Hephaestus. 

Ausonian land, Italy, so called poetically from the Ausones, an 
ancient Latin race who dwelt on the west coast of Italy before its 
conquest by the Romans. 

740. Mulciber, ' the softener, welder ' (i.e. of metal), from Lat. 
mukere, 'to soften.' 

740 46. Partly a translation of Iliad I. 591 et seq., where Hephaes- 
tus describes his fall. Cf. two allusions in Milton's Lat. poems : sic 
dolet amis sum proles Junonia calum, | inter Le??iniacos prcecipitata focos 
(Elegy, VII. 81, 82) ; and qualis in ALgeam proles Junonia Lemnon | 
detttrbata sacro cecidit de limine cali (Naturam Non Pati Senium, 23). 

741. angry ; because in a dispute between Jove and Juno, Vulcan 
took the part of Juno, his mother. 

742 44. "We fall not from Virtue, like Vulcan from heaven, in 
a day," says Sir Thomas Browne, Christian Morals, i. 30. 

746. Lemnos, sacred to Hephaestus, "the Lemnian God" (Spenser, 
Muiopotmos} ; probably because it was volcanic. I think that we 
should scan : 

"On Lem|nos, th' ^igj'an isle|. Thus they | relate." 

750. engines, contrivances. 

752. harald, herald. 

756. Pandemonium, 'the home of all the demons'; cf. x. 424. 
The word seems to have been coined by Milton (from Gk. TTQ.V, 'all' 
+ SalAw, ' a demon '). Some prefer the form ' Pandemonium.' Milton's 
picture, in itself, does not seem to me to owe anything to Dante's 
description of the City of Dis ( = Lucifer or Satan) in cantos vin., ix., 
of the Inferno ; apart, possibly, from the suggestion of the idea. 

7 58. squared regiment = ' ' perfect phalanx," 5 50. 

763 66. "He alludes to those accounts of the single combats 



398 PARADISE LOST. BOOK I. 

between the Saracens ('Panim chivalry') and Christians (cf. 582) in 
Spain and Palestine, of which the old romances are full " (Callander) : 
using, as in S. A. in the dispute between Samson and Harapha, the 
technical terms of the mediaeval duello. For a good description of such 
scenes cf. The Faerie Queene, IV. 3. 4 et seq. 

763. Possibly "covered field" = Fr. champ clos, the space for 
combat, enclosed with barriers or 'lists'; cf. S. A. 1087, "listed field." 
champions ; the technical word for combatants campiones qui in 
campum descendant et dtiello seu monomachia decertant (Ducange). 

764. wont, were wont. Soldan, the Sultan. 

765. 766. Panim, pagan. He mentions the two kinds of combat 
(i) that fought out "to the utterance " (Macbeth, in. i. 72), i.e. till one 
of the fighters was killed: cf. "mortal duel," S. A. 1102; (2) that 
which was merely an exhibition of skill, spears and swords with 
blunted points being used, career, a short gallop at high speed. 

767. . Cf. II. 528. 

76875. as bees. The simile had been used by Homer, Iliad 
II. 87 et seq., and Vergil, sEneid I. 430 36, VI. 707 709. 

The prevalence of s is meant to suggest the scene ' sound 
echoing sense ' ; so that one is tempted to print with the original 
editions 'rustling.' In King Lear, II. 4. 304, the Quartos have russel 
{rustle), for the less obvious ruffle (Folio). 

769. Taurus, one of the signs of the Zodiac ; strictly, the time of 
year defined is April 19 May 20. Cf. x. 671 73. 

with; not 'in company with,' since Taurus is a fixed constellation, 
but 'in the neighbourhood of (Beeching). 

774. expatiate=. Lat. spatior, walk abroad ' ; cf Blount, " Expatiate 
to wander, to stray, to spread abroad." confer, confer of, discuss. 

776. straitened, crowded, pressed together. 

777 80. Spirits, we have seen (428), can contract themselves. 

A passage like this brings before us one of the great difficulties 
inherent in the design of Paradise Lost, namely the representation of 
the angels, good and evil. Milton (says Johnson) "saw that immateriality 
supplied no images, and that he could not show angels acting but by 
instruments of action [i.e. bodies] ; he therefore invested them with 
form and matter" notably in his account (bk. vi.) of the battle in 
Heaven. Yet sometimes they are viewed as "incorporeal Spirits" 
(789), and it is seemingly as a spirit that Satan enters the form of 
the toad (iv. 800), and of the Serpent (ix. 85, 86, 187 90). There 
is in fact some inconsistency: "his infernal and celestial powers are 
sometimes pure spirit, and sometimes animated body" (Johnson). The 
difficulty is really insuperable, but Milton purposely modifies its effect, 



NOTES. 399 

particularly in the case of the evil angels, by several passages ; see the 
notes on i. 42329, v. 478, vi. 327. As regards the good angels, 
I suppose he would have argued that divine beings had the power to 
assume corporeal forms and to resume their incorporeal being; whereas 
the evil angels, through sin, gradually lost their immateriality and were 
forced "to incarnate and imbrute" (ix. 166). 

780, 781. Pliny (Nat. History, vn. u. 26) placed the dwelling 
of the Pygmies (575) "beyond the source of the Ganges even in the 
edge and skirts of the mountains." So Batman vppon Bartholome 
(1582 ed., p. 377), "Pigmei be little men of a cubite long... and they 
dwell in mountaines of Inde." 

that, the well-known, whose name needs no mention. 

781. beyond the Indian mottnt; probably he means Imaus (cf. III. 
431), in classical writers (e.g. Pliny) the western chain of the Himalayas, 
i.e. between the Ganges and the Caspian. It should be noticed 
that extra Imaum (i.e. east of or "beyond") and intra Imaum 
(i.e. west of) were phrases employed by map-makers of the i7th 
century to describe (with convenient vagueness) regions of Central 
Asia. Thus in Mercator's map of Tartary we have Scythia extra and 
Scythia intra Imaum montem. Milton's readers might be reminded 
of this common distinction. 

78185. A reminiscence of A Midsummer-Nigh? s Dream, II. i. 28, 
29, 141 (a play constantly imitated by Milton). Cf. too, Tie Rape of 
the Lock, 31, "Of airy Elves by moonlight shadows seen." Commonly 
"fairies" and "elves" (more rustic in character) are distinguished. 

sees, or dreams he sees-, from Vergil's aut videt aut vidisse putat per 
nubila lunam ^Eneid vi. 454. 

785, 786. arbitress, witness'; cf. Horace's non infideles arbitra  
Nox et Diana Epod. v. 50, 51. She comes " nearer to the Earth" 
because influenced (n. 665, 666) by the fairies, pale, with alarm. 

790, 791. i.e. they had so contracted their forms that, though 
numberless, they had plenty of room to move about (Richardson). 

795. recess, retirement. His application of the ecclesiastical word 
"conclave" to the assembly of evil angels seems sarcastic: that being 
the term specially applied to "the Meeting or Assembly of the 
Cardinals for the Election [of the Pope], or for any important affair 
of the Church" (Blount). Cf. his contemptuous reference in Of 
Reformation in England, i, to the "councils (i.e. of the Church) and 
conclaves that demolish one another " (P. W. n. 389), and the similar 
;e of "consistory," P. R. L 42 . See x. 313, note. Strictly "con- 
:lave, like Lat. conclave, meant the room in which a meeting took 
place : then the meeting itself. 



4OO PARADISE LOST. BOOK II. 

797. frequent= Lat. frequens, 'crowded, numerous.' 
797, 798. after... summons read. Cf. 573 and Tennyson, Pelleas 
and Ettarre, "after trumpet blown." consult, consultation; commonly 
the result of a consultation, i.e. a decision, decree = Lat. consultutn. 



BOOK II. 

1. There is a counterpart to this Council in Paradise Regained, II. 
"5 2 35- The picture of the debate may reflect Milton's recollections 
of the meetings of the Council of State to which he was Latin Secretary. 

high on a throne. Cf. v. 756. The mock-heroic opening of the 
second book of The Dunciad is modelled on this passage. 

2. Ormus ; the ancient Armuza, a town situate on an island near 
the mouth of the Persian Gulf; called Armous in Webb's Travels (1590) 
see Arber's ed., p. 23. It was much celebrated as a mart for pearls 
and jewels; cf. Howell's Familiar Letters, " Ormus... the greatest 
Mart in all the Orient for all sorts of jewels" (Jacobs' ed. 1892, i. 157), 
and Marvell, Song of the Emigrants, "Jewels more rich than Ormus 
shows." The Elizabethan traveller Coryat (1611) compares it with 
Venice, "of which the inhabitants may as proudly vaunt as I have 
read the Persians have done of their Ormus, who say that if the 
world were a ring, then should Ormus be the gem thereof. " Hexham 
(1636) calls it Ormus Emporium, and Heylyn says, '* in regard of the 
situation, it was one of the richest Empories in all the world ; the wealth 
of Persia and East-India being brought hither" (Cosmography, 1682 ed., 
III. 143). Tasso mentions it (Fairfax, xvn. -25). 

2 4. Cf. Love's Labours Lost, iv. 3. 222, 223 : 

"like a rude and savage man of Ind, 
At the first opening of the gorgeous east" 

Wordsworth borrowed the phrase in his Sonnet On the Extinction of 
the Venetian Republic; cf. the first line, "Once did She hold the 
gorgeous East in fee." The form Ind (or Inde} is common in poets 
cf. Comus, 606. The first settlements of the East India Company dated 
from about 1653, and English people were beginning to hear more 
concerning the wealth of India (cf. 638). 

or -where, i.e. of the places where. " It was the eastern cere- 
mony, at the coronation of their kings, to powder them with gold- 
dust and seed-pearl " (Warburton) ; also to strew pearls and jewels at 
the monarch's feet. Shakespeare knew of the custom (cf. Antony and 
Cleopatra, n. 5. 45, 46), which some traveller must have related. At 
the end of his History of Moscovia M. gives a list of authorities, mainly 



NOTES. 401 

' Voyages ' and ' Travels ' (e.g. Hakluyt and Purchas) ; and passages like 
this and in. 437 39 show how he used such sources of information. 

4. Cf. Pope, Temple of Fame, 94, " With diamond flaming 
and barbaric gold." Bar baric us is an epithet of aurum in &neid 
II. 504. 

5. merit, i.e. of daring most against the Almighty (Cowper). 
9. success, ill-fortune. 

12 17. He calls them "Deities of Heaven" because he still 
regards Heaven as theirs. Exactly similar parentheses are v. 361, 362 
(note), and X. 460 62. In each case the clause introduced by for 
explains some particular word or phrase in the previous sentence. 

14. i.e. I do not consider Heaven lost. Cf. S. A. 1697, " So 
Virtue, given for lost," and George Herbert, Church Porch, " Who 
say, I care not,' those I give for lost." See too The Winter's Tale, 
in. 2. 96. 

17. i.e. have such trust in themselves as not to fear. 

20. Cf. I. 635 37. counsel', some needlessly change to council. 

23. unenvied, not to be envied, unenvia<?. 

28. the Thunderer, the Almighty ; an obviously fitting title here ; 
see I. 93, 174 77, 258. Cf. Tonans applied to Jupiter. 

42. we now debate. The Councils of Diabolus and his followers 
(Lucifer, Beelzebub, Belial and other outcast spirits) in Bunyan's Holy 
War (1682) may well have owed something to the model furnished by 
Milton. 

44. fiercest. See I. 392. Moloch ("furious king," vi. 357) is con- 
spicuous in the great battle in Heaven. Newton reminds us of Homer's 
phrase ac^Trrouxos 8a<rtXeis (Iliad I. 279). 

50. thereafter  * accordingly ' (i.e. as not fearing God), or 'there- 
upon.' 

51. sentence, opinion, vote, Lat. sententia', cf. 291. 

52. more unexpert, less experienced in them than in war. 

59. i.e. the prison assigned by his tyranny. For Milton no word 
has worse associations than ' tyranny ' ; cf. his treatises, A Defence of 
the People of England, xn., " the two greatest mischiefs of this life, and 
most pernicious to virtue, tyranny and superstition " ; and The Ready 
Way, "the most prevailing usurpers over mankind, superstition and 
tyranny" (P. W. I. 212, u. 113). See 25557, note > an d I. 124. 
There is a good deal about "tyrants" and "tyranny" in Milton's 
Common-place Book (see ix. 200, note), which reflects his and his age's 
deep interest in the question of forms of government. 

60 70. Contrast Belial's reply, 129 42. 

63. tortures^ the things that torture us. 

P, L, 26 



402 PARADISE LOST. BOOK II. 

67. fire and horror ; cf. I. 502, note. equal, i.e. to his. 

69. Tartarean. Milton applies to this nether world terms 
drawn from the classics; see 506, 858, 883. Strictly, the practice 
involves some incongruity of effect ; cf. the mixture of classical and 
Scriptural allusions in Lycidas. No doubt, M. was influenced by the 
Renaissance fashion of identifying the Hell of Christian theology with 
that of classical writers. We find the same combination of pagan 
mythology and Hebrew story in the Italian poets, e.g. in the Paradiso, 
xn. 10 18, where the classical legend of Iris and the Biblical story 
of the rainbow are interwoven. 

73, 74. such, i.e. those who think the way difficult. Used as 
a noun drench ('that which drenches,' i.e. wets thoroughly) was, and 
is, commonly applied to a draught of physic for animals. Here there- 
fore it is a contemptuous word as in the Animadversions, 2, "to diet 
their ignorance, and want of care, with the limited draught of a matin 
and even-song drench," P. W. III. 57. Moloch's object is to rouse 
them to action by taunts, forgetful lake= " oblivious pool," i. -266. 

75 81. See I. 633, 634, and cf. the account of the expulsion of the 
angels from Heaven, vi. 856 77. Not being subject to the law of 
gravitation they did not fall, but were driven down by force. 

75. proper, natural = ~Lo.. propritis, 'belonging to oneself.' 

77. tt='that not'; usually in a negative clause; cf. The 
Tempest, i. 2. 209, "not a soul but felt a fever," i.e. that did not. So 
Richard III. I. 3. 186. (See Abbott, Shakesp. Gram. p. 84.) 

79. the deep, Chaos. 

82 84. The lines give a supposed objection from one of the 
audience, event, issue (i. 624). 

89. exercise, torment ; a Latinism. 

90 92. Thyer quotes The Teares of the Muses * 125, 126: 
"Ah, wretched world I 1 and all that is therein, 

The vassals of Gods wrath, and slaves of sin"; 

and A Midsummer-Nigh? s Dream, v. i. 37, "To ease the anguish of a 
torturing hour" The latter phrase is borrowed by Gray, Hymn to 
Adversity, 3. inexorably ; so the original editions ; he may have 
dictated inexorable. 

92. calls', singular because the two subjects really form a single 
idea ('punishment'); cf. I. 139. 

97. essential, essence, substance, viz. of their angelic forms. In 
M., as in Shakespeare, an adj. = a noun is very common (cf. 406, 409, 
438) : an illustration of Dr Abbott's remark that in Elizabethan E. 
"almost any part of speech can be used as any other part of speech." 

99, joo. Cf. 14654, and i. 117. 



NOTES. 403 

100, 101. at worst) i.e. we have already reached the worst point 
(cf. 162, 163), short of absolute annihilation. Satan argues somewhat 
similarly in Paradise Regained, ill. 204 u. To place at "worst 
between commas changes the sense. 

104. fatal, upheld by fate (i. 133), hence secure. 

109. Belial', see I. 490, note. In the systems of the demonologists 
Belial holds high rank; Heywood (Hierarchic, 1635, p. 436) makes 
him head of the fourth of the nine Orders into which the fallen angels 
were divided (corresponding with the nine Heavenly Orders). In 
assigning to Belial the two qualities of personal beauty and per- 
suasive speech M. has followed tradition. Cf. Scot's Discoverie of 
Witchcraft (1584), "This Beliall...taketh the form of a beautifull 
Angell, he speaketh faire" (xv. 2). htimane, polished, refined. 

113. manna, words sweet as manna, "the taste of [which] was 
like wafers made wiih'iomy," Exod. xvi. 31. 

113, 114. Alluding, as Bentley noted, to the profession of the 
Sophists TOV TjTTb) 6yov KpeLrrfji Troieiv. The reproach was made 
against Socrates; cf. Plato, Apology 18 B, which probably alludes to the 
satirical lines referring to Socrates in Aristophanes' Clouds 112 15. 

Bacon says : " So likewise we see that Anytus, the accuser of Socrates, 
laid it as an article of charge and accusation against him, that he did... 
profess a dangerous and pernicious science, which was, to make the 
worse matter seem the better, and to suppress truth by force of eloquence 
and speech" (The Advancement of Learning, I. 2. i). Cf. Milton's 
Tetrachordon, " as was objected to Socrates by them who could not 
resist his efficacy, that he ever made the worst cause [i.e. 6yos] 
seem the better," P. W. in.. 320. dash, confound, cast down. 

117. timorous and slothful ; as might be inferred (i. 490 503). 

119. The first part of his speech answers Moloch point by point. 

124. in fact of arm s = Fr. en fait dtarmes, i.e. in deeds, exploits; 
f act = feat in sense as in etymology (LaA.. factum). 

127. scope, aim, mark; Gk. OTTOTTOS. 

129. " Note the great pauses in Belial's speech " (Tennyson). 

130. render; plural, because watch watchmen. 

132. Scan obscure (cf. Hamlet, IV. 5. 213), and see 210, note. 

139 42. mould, substance, i.e. of the angels, whom Moloch ' 
would assail with Hell-fire. Spiritual frames, M. has said (i. 117), 
are formed of an "empyreal substance," i.e. of pure fire; cf. Psalm 
civ. 4, " Who maketh his angels spirits ; his ministers a flaming fire." 
And this fire, argues Belial here and in 215, 216, will, through its 
greater purity, prevail over (i.e. be insensible to) the " baser " fire 
of Hell. 

26 2 



404 PARADISE LOST. BOOK II. 

143. flat, absolute, complete. Cf. King John, m. i. 298. 

146. Gray's editors trace to these lines the stanza (Elegy, 85 88) : 
"For who to dumb Forgetfulness a prey 
This pleasing anxious being e'er resigned ? " etc. 

148. Cf. Wordsworth's lines on the statue of Newton at Trinity 
College (The Prelude, bk. in.). 

151. motion', probably from Measure for Measure, III. i. 120 
Todd). See 180, note. 

155 59. This thought that the evil angels must live, so that they 
may suffer the more, is not peculiar to M. Thus Grotius (Adaimis 
Exul) makes Satan say, mors tma...  mihi siimma voti est; nee, quod 
extremum est mails,  licet perire ; and Sir Thomas Browne, Religio 
Medici, I. li., has, "the devil, were it in his power, would do the like 
[viz. destroy himself] ; which being impossible, his miseries are endless, 
and he suffers most in that attribute... his immortality." He has the 
same thought in his Christian Morals, n. xiii. (end). 

156. Ironical, belike, perhaps, no doubt ; only here in M., but 
many times in Shakespeare; cf. Hamlet, in. 2. 305. impotence, lack 
of self-restraint ( = Lat. impotentid). 

159. cease, i.e. from war : ' why give up the struggle ? ' 

160. they who, Moloch: a courteously indirect reference, consonant 
with Belial's " humane " character. 

162, 163. A very similar passage is P. R. in. 203 n. 

165. what when, i.e. how was it when what was our state? 
Many texts print a note of exclamation (not in the original editions) 
after what, making the sentence an anacoluthon. Rhetorical questions 
are a favourite literary device, amain, with all speed, strook ; Milton's 
preference for this form to struck is marked (Masson). 

1 66. afflicting; perhaps in the lit. sense of affligere; cf. I. 186. 
168, 169. See i. 50 53, 311 13. chained', see I. 48. 

170. Isaiah xxx. 33. 

1 74. redright hand= rubens dextera of Jupiter (Horace, Od. 1. 2. 2, 3). 
I 75> *76. this firmament, i.e. of "the horrid roof" (644) of Hell 
to which he points, cataracts, floods, torrents; Gk. KarappaKT^, 'a 
waterfall.' See XI. 824, note. 

1 80 82. Editors compare sEneid VI. 75, rapidis ludibria ventis 
(" the sport of every wind," Dryden), and 740, 741. Probably M. had 
in his thoughts Measure for Measure, III. i. 124 26 : 
' ' To be imprison'd in the viewless winds, 
And blown with restless violence round about 
The pendent world" [cf. 1052]. 
182. racking ; Keight ley says, " sweeping, driving along. Clouds 



NOTES. 405 

thus driven are called the rack " (cf. " the racking clouds," 3 Henry VI. 
I. i. 27). But perhaps = 'torturing.' Cf. I. 126. 

184. converse, dwell with ; Lat. cum, ' with ' + versari, ' to dwell.' 

185. With M. (even in his prose, as Todd noted) and other poets 
a favourite arrangement of words, expressing emphasis ; cf. v. 899, 
S. A. 1422, P. R. ill. 429, Hamlet, I. 5. 77. Compare the repetition 
in the Greek dramatists of adjectives compounded with the negative 
prefix d- ( = Eng. un-} ; e.g. in Euripides, Hecuba 669, cforcus, avavdpos, 

^e(pdapj.^vri ; and Sophocles, Antigone 1071, a^oipov, ctcr^- 

a.v6(TlOV V^KVV. 

187. open or concealed. Seel. 661, 662. 

190, 191. "He that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh: the Lord 
shall have them in derision," Psalm ii. 4. motions, proposals, schemes ; 
cf. the verb in ix. 229. 

194 96. A supposed objection ; cf. 82 84. 

199. to suffer.. Jo do. Editors quote: Et facer e et pati fortia 
Romanum est, Livy, II. 12: quidvis et facere et pati, Horace, Od. III. 
24. 43. Sir Thomas Browne says, "A man may confide in persons 
constituted for noble ends, who dare do and suffer" Christian Morals, 
I. 25. See i. 158, note. 

207. ignominy, a trisyllable (i. 115). The ist Folio prints ignomy 
in i Henry IV. v. 4. 100, "Thy ignomy sleep with thee in the grave." 

210. Scan supreme. This throwing back of the accent in dis- 
syllabic adjectives is usual in M. (and Shakespeare) when they precede a 
monosyllable or a noun accented on the first syllable. Cf. I. 735, Comus, 
273, "Not any boast of skill, but extreme shift," 421, "She that has 
that is clad in complete steel. " 

211. far removed', cf. 321, and see I. 74, 75, note. 

215, 216. essence', see 439. vapour; used of hot exhalations, as 
in xn. 635. inured, accustomed to the flames. To inure is literally 
'to bring into practice' ( = ure). 

217 19. Cf. 274 78. temper, temperament. 

219. void of pain-, a consideration appropriate to Belial, who 
represents slothful ease and luxury. 

220. light', a noun, surely; to take it as an adj., 'easy,' is to lose ^ 
the fine hyperbole that for them darkness may become light. 

Cowper notes the awkwardness of the rhyme in 220, 221 : "rhyme " 
(he adds) "is apt to come uncalled, and to writers of blank verse is often 
extremely troublesome." 

224. for happy, regarded as happy looked at from that standpoint. 

226 28. His counsel accords with his effeminate character (i. 490). 
Cf. Comus, 759, "Obtruding false rules pranked in reason's garb." 
ignoble easeignobile otium, Vergil, Georg. iv. 564. 



406 PARADISE LOST. BOOK II. 

228. thus Mammon. See I. 678. His speech partly replies to 
Moloch (since he dismisses the notion of war altogether), partly carries 
Belial's counsel a step farther. The gist of what Belial said was 'let 
us temporize, stay here and trust to chance something may happen.' 
Mammon answers 'let us indeed stay here, but not idly look to the 
future : rather straightway set about founding a realm here to compensate 
for what we have lost there.' Belial, type of ease and sloth, stands, as 
it were, halfway between Moloch and Mammon. 

This notion of a "realm" in Hell, the counterpart of that in 
Heaven, is of course purely traditional, not invented by M. Thus in 
the old Faust-book (1587) Mephistophiles tells Faustus that Hell is 
divided into ten kingdoms, under five rulers (Lucifer, Beelzebub, Belial, 
Phlegethon and Ascheroth). See Thorns' English Prose Romances, 
in. 185, 186. 

231, 232. then. ..when, i.e. then only= 'never.' A favourite phrase; 
cf. iv. 970, "Then, when I am thy captive, talk of chains." 

233. the strife, between Fate and Chance (cf. 907 10) ; or 
between the rebellious angels and the Almighty (less probable). 

2 34 2 35* the former, to unthrone the King of Heaven; the latter, 
to regain our lost rights, to hope, to hope for ; cf. VI I. 121. argues, shows, 
proves (Lat. arguere) ; this is a common Elizabethan use. Cf. iv. 830. 

241 43. See v. 161 63. forced', contrast vi. 744. 

245. ambrosial, often used by M., as by Tennyson, of that which 
delights the sense of taste or of smell. Cf. ambrosia^ fragrance,' v. 57. 

249. pursue, seek after, try to regain, i.e. "our state" (251). 

254. Horace, Epist. I. 18. 107, 108, et mihi vivam  quod superest 
cevi. We may note the oxymorons in these lines (252 57). 

255 57. It was a favourite thought with Milton that many men 
would rather have "Bondage with ease than strenuous liberty" (S. A. 
271): i.e. would sacrifice their freedom to save the trouble of main- 
taining it. Sallust, his favourite historian (as M. writes in a Letter 
to Lord Henry de Bras), makes .dimilius Lepidus say accipite 
otium cum servitio ...mihi potior visa est periculosa libertas quiet o 
servitio. Aubrey (reflecting, no doubt, what he had heard from Milton's 
nephew Edward Phillips and others acquainted with the poet) says that 
Milton's intense "zeal to the liberty of mankind," and his republicanism, 
came largely from his admiration of the Roman writers and Roman 
Commonwealth. Similarly Hobbes complained that at the Universities 
young men learnt from the classics to despise monarchy (see Marvell, 
" English Men of Letters Series," pp. n, 12). 

26367. Cf. Psalm xviii. n, 13; and xcvii. *, "Clouds and dark- 
ness are round about him." 

27073. See i. 670 et seq. 



NOTES. 407 

271. wants not, does not lack. 

273. magnificence ; such as the palace described in I. 710 et seq. 

'74 275. All existing things were supposed to consist of four 
elements or constituent parts fire, air, water, earth ; and in each 
element dwelt certain Spirits or daemons peculiar to it, ruling it, and 
partaking of its nature. Cf.  Penseroso, 93, 94 : 

"And of those daemons that are found 
In fire, air, flood, or under ground." 

That these daemons were the fallen angels was a common view; see 
Appendix, pp. 67274. When M. makes Mammon say that their 
"torments" (i.e. Hell's fires) may become their "element," he clearly 
alludes to these beliefs. 

278. sensible, sense; adjective for noun. 

281. compose, adjust, i.e. adapt ourselves to. 

282. where; so the First Ed. ; the Second Ed. has were. 

284 90. Cf. v. 872, 873. Editors compare Iliad n. 144, JEneid 
X. 96 99. For the elaboration of the simile cf. the note on 488 95. 

288. overwatched, tired with watching ; cf. S. A. 405. 

292. field, battle. 

294. the sword of Michael, i.e. the "two-handed" sword, "from 
the armoury of God" (vi. 251, 321), with which in the battle in 
Heaven Michael laid low the rebellious angels and disabled Satan 
himself (vi. 320 30). Not mentioned in Daniel or Revelation. 

299, 300. In Scripture Beel-zebub = Baal-zebub, 'lord of flies,' is 
the Sun-god of the Philistines, i.e. a local manifestation of the great 
deity Baal (see I. 422), his chief oracle being at Ekron, "where 
answers seem to have been obtained from the hum and motions of 
flies" (Sayce). In P. L. he ranks next to Satan (see v. 671, note). 
Perhaps this notion that he was one of the chief of the infernal powers 
was due to the rendering of Mat. xii. 24, where the title "prince of 
the devils" is really applied to Beel-zebu, 'lord of the heavenly 
height ' (cf. the margin). 

301, 302. Scan aspect, as often in M. and Shakespeare ; cf. v. 733, 
Vi. 450. Newton quotes 2 Henry VI. I. r. 75, ' Brave peers of England, 
pillars of the state." front, brow, Lat.frons; cf. Hamlet, in. 4. 56. 

306. Atlantean, worthy of Atlas, one of the Titans, who as a% 
punishment for making war on Zeus was condemned to bear heaven on 
his shoulders. Cf. Spenser, sonnet to Lord Burleigh : 

"As the wide compasse of the firmament 
On Atlas mighty shoulders is upstayd." 

" The myth seems to have arisen from the idea that lofty mountains 
supported the heaven" (Class. Diet.}. 



408 PARADISE LOST. BOOK II. 

309. thus he spake ; and what he says sweeps on one side the main 
arguments of the previous speakers. 'War,' he urges, recognising 
their true position, ' with the Almighty (such as Moloch counsels), that 
is ridiculous : peace (such as Belial and Mammon dream of), that is not 
to be hoped for : suffer we must and shall, but suffering may be 
lightened by revenge and that of a subtler kind than Moloch pro- 
poses.' The speech of each deity is carefully differentiated, and 
consistent with his character. Similarly in the later books (v. VIIL, 
xi., xil.) the good angels Raphael and Michael are drawn on contrasting 
lines. But, in the main, the characters of the evil angels " are more 
diversified" (Johnson). 

311, 312. these titles ; see I. 737. style, title, appellation; cf. 
2 Henry VI. I. 3. 51, 52: 

"Am I a queen in title and in style, 
And must be made a subject to a duke?" 

313. for so ; alluding to the applause which Mammon had (284). 

315. In the original editions doubtless has a semicolon before and 
after, i.e. it is a parenthetic sarcasm : * build up here an empire as is so 
veiy likely ! ' Some remove the second semicolon and explain : ' while 
we dream undisturbed by any doubt.' 

324. " I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last," Rev. i. n ; 
also xxi. 6, xxii. 13. Cf. Ben Jonson, Masque of Augurs , "Jove is that 
one, whom first, midst, last you call." highth or depth, Heaven or Hell. 

327, 328. Cf. Abdiel's warning to Satan, v. 88688. In each 
case there is an allusion to Psalm ii. 9, "Thou shalt break them 
with a rod of iron" (cf. Rev. ii. 27). The distinction between 
iron typifying hostility and gold typifying benevolence is part of the 
symbolism in which M. delights. Cf. Lycidas, no, in, where St Peter 
bears "two massy keys" the golden admitting to Heaven, the iron 
excluding. A rod of gold, ' the Rod of Equity, 3 is among the regalia 
of the English Crown. 

those, his loyal subjects, the angels who had not rebelled with 
Satan. 

330. determined, made an end of us, i.e. crushed us. Cf. vi. 318. 

336. to, to the best of; cf. The Winter's Tale, v. 2. 182, "I will 
prove so, sir, to my power," and Coriolanus, II. i. 262. 

337. untamed, not to be tamed, reluctance, resistance. 

345 51. Addison considered this ancient prophecy in heaven con- 
cerning the creation of man a wonderfully imaginative stroke : "Nothing 
could shew more the dignity of the species, than this tradition which ran 
of them before their existence. They are represented to have been the 
talk of heaven before they were created... Milton gives us a glimpse of 



NOTES. 409 

them even before they are in being." See I. 65054, note. fame=L,3it. 
fama in the literal sense 'report' ; cf. i. 651. 

352, 353 by an oath. Cf. v. 607; see Gen. xxii. 16, "By myself have 
I sworn, saith the LORD," and sat. xlv. 23. 

that shook; cf. sEneid ix. 106, annuit et totum nutu tremefecit 
Olympum itself from Homer, Iliad I. 530, ptyav 5* eXAi^e? "OXvfjLirov 
(the subject of the verb being Zeus) ; echoed by Dryden, Alexander's 
Feast, 35 37. Epic poetry has its conventions and formulas, handed 
down from Homer to Vergil, from Vergil to the Italian poets. 

360. Contrast 410 13 ; here he purposely lessens the danger. 

375. The First Ed. has originals, which shows that original 
= originator, parent (i.e. Adam). Cf. The Reason of Church Govern- 
ment, I. 3, "run questing up as high as Adam to fetch their original," 
P. W. II. 449, and A Midsummer- Nigh? s Dream, n. i. 117, "We are 
their parents and original." Some explain it =' earliest condition, 
primitive state.' 

376 78. advise, consider, or to, i.e. whether it is better to. 
vain empires ; such as Mammon foreshadowed. 

382, 383. confound, utterly ruin, one root, Adam (i Cor. xv. 22). 

384, 385. Cf. Raphael's warning that Satan would plot Adam's 
fall, "As a despite done against the Most High" (vi. 906). 

387. States ; often used by Shakespeare of a body of representa- 
tives or parliament; cf. King John, II. 395, "How like you this wild 
counsel, mighty states?" So here; cf. the phrase 'estates of the 
realm,' and etats in French. 

391. synod, meeting, assembly; cf. VI. 156, xi. 67. 

397 402. In later times,- according to tradition, some of the out- 
cast angels do become 'Spirits of air,' and dwell in " mild seats" of the 
middle region of air. 

398. not unvisited', M. is fond of this classical figure of meiosis or 
under-statement. 

404. tempt, try, essay, Lat. temptare. 

406. obscure, obscurity: "palpable obscure " = " palpable dark- 
ness," xii. 188, i.e. "darkness which may be felt" Exod. x. 21. V 
Drayton had used the phrase "darkness palpable," and the Preface to 
the A.V. speaks of "thick and palpable clouds of darkness." Without 
doubt, the original of all these passages was Exod. x. 2 1 in the Vulgate 
tenebrce tarn densce ut palpari qiteant. (From Newton.) Lat. palpare= 
'to stroke, feel.' 

407. uncotith, strange ; cf. 827. 

409. the vast abrupt, the gulf between Hell and the World. 
arrive, arrive at, reach j cf. Milton's divorce-pamphlet, The Judg- 



410 PARADISE LOST. BOOK II. 

ment of Martin Bucer, " if our things here below arrive him where he 
is," P. W. III. 282; so Julius Ccesar, i. 2. no, "But ere we could 
arrive the point proposed." In Elizabethan E. this omission of the 
preposition with verbs of motion is common. 

410. the happy isle, i.e. the Universe of this World, hung (1051) 
in Chaos, which is a kind of "sea" (1011) : hence the peculiar fitness 
of comparing Satan, as he journeys through Chaos, to a vessel making 
for its port (1041 44). See again in. 76. 

412. senteries ; so the original editions, and the metre requires 
the form. Perhaps the form sentery was due to the notion that the 
word came from Fr. sentier, 'a path,' Lat. semita ; it is thought to be 
a corruption of sentinel, stations =Lat. stationes, 'guards, pickets.' 

413. had, would have. 

415. choice, care in selecting by vote some one to send. 

423. astonished, struck with dismay, prime, chief, Lat.riVw. 

425. proffer, offer himself, volunteer. 

430. With this speech cf. P. R. I. 44 105. The scenes are 
similar. In each case Satan undertakes a design from which his 
followers shrink here against Mankind, there against Christ. And 
there he reminds them how he alone faced the former danger, and 
argues that, having succeeded once, he will succeed again. 

432, 433. An echo of JEneid VI. 126 29, where the Sibyl tells 
tineas that the descent into Avernus is easy : 

"But to return, and view the cheerful skies, 

In this the task and mighty labour lies" (Dryden). 
The slow monosyllabic rhythm and the alliteration seem intended by 
Milton to suggest the laborious effort of ascent. 

434. convex, vault ( = Lat. convexuni)', a poetical use; cf. vn. 266. 

438. the void profound^ Lucretius' inane profundum. Cf. Tenny- 
son's line; " Ruining along the illimitable inane " (Lucretius). 

439. unessential Night, i.e. having no substance or being, essence 
= Lat. essentia (from esse) = Gk. ovo-la (or TO ov, 'that which really 
exists'). Night, he means, is a mere vacuity (932). 

441. abortive, monstrous, because unnatural, i.e. born prematurely. 
He speaks of the gulf as though it were some monstrosity, horrible 
through premature birth. Others says 'rendering abortive.' 

448. moment, importance. Cf. " of great moment," Hamlet, in. 
i. 86 ; "of no moment," 3 Henry VI. I. 2. 22. 

450. me ; purposely emphatic by position. 

452. refusing, if I refuse : honours and dangers go together. 

457. intend, consider ; a Latinism. 

461. deceive, beguile ; cf. Cowper, " to deceive the time, not waste 



NOTES. 41 1 

it." So Lat. decipere e.g. in Horace's dulci laborum decipitur sono 
is beguiled into forgetting his troubles (Od. n. 13. 38). 
465, 466. The abrupt form of the ending is significant. 

467. prevented, anticipated, forestalled. 

468. raised, encouraged ; agreeing with others. 
478. awful, full of awe, respect ; cf. Nat. Ode, 59. 

483 85. i.e. "Let not bad men set much store by those casual 
acts of seeming nobleness to which glory or ambition may doubtless 
spur even the worst of them ; for neither have that other class of evil 
beings... lost such virtue as this " (Masson). 

485. close, secret ; often in Shakespeare, varnished. . .with, speciously 
hidden by. 

488 95. This simile is typical of many in Milton : similes classical 
in manner, more like Vergil's than Shakespeare's. The peculiarity is 
that he works the simile out, in all its bearings, into a picture complete 
in itself but rather detached from the context. Cf. I. 768 75. 

489. while the North-wind sleeps Homer's 6(f>p etfSflo-i x&os Bopt'ao 
(. v. 524), "that wind generally... dispersing clouds" (Newton). See 
xi. 842, note. 

490, 491. element, sky. 

492. if chance, if it chances that; cf. Comus, 508, "How chance 
she is not in your company ? " The verb-construction (e.g. how does it 
chance that?') is influenced by the noun-phrase ('by what chance?'). 
So in A Midsummer -Night 's Dream, I. i. 129, "How chance the roses 
there do fade so fast ? " 

497502. The Civil Wars in England ; the Thirty Years' War in 
Germany (1618 48) ; the Civil War of the Fronde in France (1648 52). 

501. Dr Bradshaw notes that the phrase to levy war (see xi. 219), 
which Johnson censured, was a technical term found in legal documents 
and statutes. He cites from one of Barrow's Sermons (May 29, 1676), 
"those in the late times who, instead of praying for their sovereign,... 
did raise tumults, and levy war against him." Add Tennyson, Queen 
Mary, II. i, "must we levy war against the Queen's Grace?" 

503. to accord, to agree among ourselves. 

508. Paramount, lord, chief. 

512. globe, compact band ; cf. P. R. iv. 581. Lat. globus is used 
similarly of a close mass of men. 

513. emblazonry, i.e. shields emblazoned (i. 538) or figured with 
designs, horrent, bristling (see i. 563, note). 

5 1 4. Only the great angels had taken part in the council (i. 792 98) ; 
the others were awaiting its result. 



412 PARADISE LOST. BOOK II. 

516. i.e. towards the four quarters of the compass; cf. in. 326, 
and see Ezekiel xxxvii. 9, "Come from the four winds, O breath, and 
breathe upon these slain, that they may live." 

517, 518. alchymy, trumpets made of the metal called ' alchemy 
gold' or 'alchemy.' Misunderstanding the word, Bentley proposed 
Orichalc Gk. 6peixa.Kos, Lat. orichalcum (cf. JEndd xii. 87), yellow 
copper ore, and the brass made therefrom, harald ; cf. I. 752. 

522. ranged, assembled in ranks. 

526. entertain, pass, while away ; cf. the Argument of this book, 
" to entertain the time till Satan return," a phrase used by Shake- 
speare; cf. Lucrece, 1361, "The weary time she cannot entertain," 
and Sonnet 39. The picture of the angels variously employed recalls 
Vergil's description of the souls of the blessed in Elysium with their 
diversions, ALneid vi. 640 et seq. 

528 32. These "heroic games" (iv. 551, a similar scene) are 
Milton's counterpart to the Trojan sports, jEneid V. 577 et seq., and those 
of the Myrmidons, withheld from war, Iliad II. 773 et seq. : whence too 
the contests in The Dunciad. 

528. sublime = Lat. sublimis in the literal sense ' aloft,' ' uplifted' ; 
cf. P. R. iv. 542, "through the air sublime." 

530. Two of the great festivals of Greece were the Olympic games 
held every fifth year at Olympia, a small plain of Elis, and the 
Pythian at Delphi in honour of Apollo (the Pythian god). 

531, 532. Cf. XI. 643, "Part curb the foaming steed," i.e. in horse- 
races, or shun ; alluding (cf. Areopagitica, P. W. II. 68) to Horace, 
Od. I. i. 4, 5, metaque fervidis  tvitata rotis, i.e. in chariot-races. To 
the chariot-races at Olympia M. refers in his sixth Elegy, 26 (volat Eleo 
pulvert fuscus eques), in the lines on Pindar. Cf. Dryden, Annus 
Mirabilis, stanza 56. brigads ; cf. I. 675. 

533. Probably the Aurora Borealis is meant, to warn ; because 
considered omens. 

534. Newton quotes r Henry IV. I. i. 10, " like the meteors of a 
troubled heaven. ' ' 

535- van, vanguard ; Fr. avant-garde. 

539. Typhcean; see I. 199, and cf. Astrcea Redux, 37, 38: 
"Thus when the bold Typhceus scaled the sky 

And forced great Jove from his own heaven to fly." 
But Typhon is the commoner form in English. 

540. ride the air ; cf. Macbeth, iv. i. 138 ; see 662, note. 

542. Alcides, Hercules, grandson of Alcoeus. The story, as com- 
monly told, was : Hercules, returning to Trachis from CEchalia where he 



NOTES. 413 

had killed Eurytus, landed at Cenaeum, the N.W. promontory of Eubcea, 
and sent Lichas, his companion, to Trachis to fetch a white robe wherein 
to sacrifice to Zeus ; Deianira, his wife, sent instead a robe dipped in 
what she thought to be a love-potion that would make Hercules true to 
her : the potion was a poison, and when Hercules put the robe on it 
ate into his flesh, and could not be removed : in his agony he hurled 
(i.e. from Censeum) Lichas into the sea, and himself aftenvards ascended 
Mt CEta in Thessaly, raised a pile of wood, and was burnt thereon. 
The story forms the subject of Sophocles' Trachinice; it is told also by 
Ovid, Metamorphoses ix., whom M. follows closely, e.g. in making 
Mt CEta the scene ; cf. Marvell, The Loyal Scot : 
' ' When CEta and Alcides are forgot, 

Our English youth shall sing the valiant Scot." 

There is a fine application of the tale in S. A. 1038, 1039, where an 
ill-matched wife is called " a cleaving mischief " to her husband. 

from (Echalia crowned', Ovid's victor ab (Echalia (136). (Echalia, 
a town in Thessaly. The First Ed. has Oealia. 

543. envenomed, because steeped by Deianira in the blood of the 
Centaur Nessus, whom Hercules had slain with a poisoned arrow. Cf. 
M. in In Obitum Procancellarii Medici, 10, n (alluding to the same 
story), ferus Hercules  Nessi -venenatus cruore. 

545. Lichas ; see The Merchant of Venice, u. i. 32 35. 

546. Euboic sea, between Eubcea and the mainland. 

54655' Hey wood says of the infernal angels, " in Musicke they 
are skill'd" (Hierarchie, p. 441). 

552. partial, prejudiced in favour of themselves; it "was silent 
as to the corrupt motive of their conduct, and dwelt only on the sad 
consequences of it " (Cowper). 

554. suspended, held rapt, thrilled, took, enchanted. 

557. Cf. Scott's happy allusion " others apart sat on a bench 
retired, and reasoned highly on the doctrines of crime " (describing the 
lawyers at the trial of Effie Dean, The Heart of Midlothian). 

55869. Cf. S. A. 300 et seq., P. R. iv. 286 et seq., where Greek 
philosophies are sneered at; and contrast Comus, 476 80 ("How 
charming is divine Philosophy "). 

559> 560. Probably M. is ridiculing the theological controversies 
of his own age : yet he himself discourses on free-will and predestination, 
not only in The Christian Doctrine, I. iv. (P. W. IV. 43 77), but even 
in P. Z. ; cf. in. 96 128, v. 524 40. 

564, 565. Referring primarily to the Stoics, whose philosophy he 
condemns in P. R. IV. 300 et seq. : apathy (Gk. d-, * not ' -f iradeiy, 'to 
suffer ') signifying in their system insensibility to suffering, hence freedom 



414 PARADISE LOST. BOOK II. 

from passion or feeling i.e. a passionless tranqui Hias, "contemning 
all," P. R. iv. 304. Cf. the Essay on Alan, II. 101, 102 : 
"In lazy apathy let Stoics boast 

Their virtue fixed ; 'tis fixed as in a frost s " 

There is a passing allusion to "Stoic apathy" in An Apology for 
Smectymnmts (P. W. III. 136). 

568, 569. Horace, Od. I. 3. 9, UK robur et as triplex  circa 
pectus erat, where aes, like " steel " here, is figurative, obdured ; cf. 
vi. 785. 

570. gross, dense, compact. 

572. dime, region ; see I. 242. 

575 576. In the main this picture of the infernal rivers is modelled 
on the classics (cf. sEneid VI.), with touches perhaps from the much 
fuller treatment in the Inferno. But M. has added some details, e.g. the 
making of the four rivers unite in the burning lake, i.e. the "lake of 
fire" of the Revelation (xix. 20, xx. 10). He refers to the meaning of 
each river's name, the collective allusion being to the lamentations of 
the souls of the wicked, borne to their punishment, baleful, sorrowful. 

577. Styx ; from ffrvyeiv, 'to hate, abhor'; the chief river of the 
nether world, round which it flowed "with nine circling streams" 
(Dry den) = navies Styx interfusa (^Eneid vi. 439). 

578. Acheron = i> &x ca ptw, ( the stream of woe.' 

579,580. Cocytus ; Gk. KWKUTOS, 'wailing,' from KWKVCIV, * to wail.' 

580, 581. Phlegelhon ; ipXeytdw, ' flaming' ; also called " Pyriphle- 
gethon " ; waves of fire (rOp), not water, flowing in its " torrent." 

583. Lethe', Gk. ^dr], ' a forgetting.' " A river in the lower world 
was called Lethe. The souls of the departed drank of this river, and 
thus forgot all they had said or done in the upper world" (Class. Diet.). 
Cf. Dryden, sEneid, vi. 957, "The gliding Lethe leads her silent flood," 
and 968, "In Lethe's lake they long oblivion taste." There is extant 
a copy of Browne's Britannia^ s Pastorals with MS. notes pronounced 
by some to be by Milton, and over against a description of this river 
are written the words, "They who drinke of Lethe never think of love 
or ye world." 

"The topography of the infernal rivers is rather indefinite and 
varied in classical writers. Lethe is generally removed from the rivers 
of horror as in Milton" (Osgood, Classical Mythology in Milton, p. 73). 
So Dante placed Lethe, not in Inferno but in Purgatorio (see canto 
xxvin.), making it the cleansing influence by which all memory of 
sin was washed out, and inventing a companion stream, Eunoe, by 
which the memory of all good deeds was restored to a man. 

589. dire hail ; Horace'sa; satis...dira grandinis, Od. I. 2. i, 2. 



NOTES. 4*5 

590, 591. i.e. the ruin of some ancient building; cf. "pile high- 
built," S. A. 1069. 

59 2 593- La ke Serbonis (now dried up) lay on the coast of Lower 
Egypt, separated from the sea by a narrow strip of sand (Herodotus 
Hi. 5); close to Mt Casius (Herod, n. 6). 

Damiata, now Damietta on the easternmost mouth of the Nile; it 
has been identified with Pelusium. Milton's reason for introducing the 
name Damiata is, no doubt, its association with the great Italian epics. 
Ariosto makes Orlando go to Damiata (Orlando Furioso, XV. 48), and 
Tasso (xv. 16) speaks of it ; and in the Inferno, XIV. 104, it " stands 
for the Eastern civilisation which was superseded by that of Rome." 

Burke quotes these lines (592 94) with great. effect in his speech 
on Conciliation with America (Payne's ed., I. p. 196); see also his 
Reflections on the Revolution in France (n. p. 231). 

594. Primarily from Diodorus Siculus (i. 30), who says ol the 
tj,vrj TroXXoi rCov ayvootivTtov TTJV IdioTrjTO. TOV rbirov juera 
^(paviffdrjaav. How this happened, Sandys' Relation 
shows : the Lake, he says (and he had been there), was " borderd on 
each side with hils of sand, which being borne into the water by the 
winds so thickened the same, as not by the eye to be distinguished from 
a part of the Continent : by means whereof whole armies have bin 
devoured. For the sands neere-hand seeming firme, a good way entred 
slid farther off, and left no way of returning, but with a lingring cruelty 
swallowed the ingaged: whereupon it was called Barathrum.... Close to 
this standeth the mountaine Cassius (no other than a huge mole of 
sand)," p. 137. Seemingly the only historical basis of this story is the 
fact that when Darius Ochus, the Persian, invaded Egypt he lost part 
of his troops in the lake. 

594> 595- parching, used of the drying, withering effect of cold 
(cf. Lye, 13, "parching wind") or heat (cf. XII. 636). frore, frosty. 
cold... fire  Newton aptly quotes Ecclus. xliii. 21, "The cold north 
tA... burneth the wilderness, and consumeth the grass as fire" ; and 
Vergil, Georg. I. 93, ne...frigus adurat. The r...r sound may be 
meant to suggest shuddering. Aubrey says that M. "pronounced the 
letter R very hard " (and adds, " a certaine signe of a satyricall wit "). 

596 603. "This idea of making the pains of Hell consist in cold 
as well as heat [i.e. by alternations] was current in the Middle Ages... 
it seems to have come from the Rabbin [Jewish commentators], for 
they make the torments of Gehenna to consist of fire and of frost and 
snow " (Keightley). Cf. Dante, Inferno, III. 86, 87, where Charon says, 
"Woe to you, depraved spirits ! I come to lead you... into the eternal 
darkness, into fire and into ice," and the Purgatorio, in. 31, 32. Dante 



416 PARADISE LOST. BOOK II. 

makes the last circle, the ninth, of the Inferno the frozen circle, where 
the greatest sinners are confined (xxxn. xxxiv.). I find the idea 
worked out in Giles Fletcher's Christ's Victory on Earth, 22, and in 
the Faust-book (1587), where Mephistophiles describes Hell to Faustus 
in a passage closely resembling these lines : also, when Faustus is 
suffered to visit Hell, out of curiosity, he finds there "a most 
pleasant, clear and cold water; into the which many tormented 
souls sprang out of the fire to cool themselves, but being so freezing 
cold, they were constrained to return again into the fire, and thus 
wearied themselves and spent their endless torments out of one 
labyrinth into another, one while in heat, another while in cold," 
Thorns' English Prose Romances, ill. pp. 194, 212. The notion was 
known to Shakespeare; see Measure for Measure, III. i. 121 23. 
And Sir Thomas Browne introduces it in his Urn Burial, iv. 

596 597- harpy-footed, with feet like the talons of Harpies (hideous 
winged creatures, with hooked claws see sEn. in. 211 18, P. R. n. 
403). haled = hauled, dragged ; in First Ed. hailed, i.e. summoned a 
possible reading, revolutions, i.e. of time. 

600. starve, afflict, perish with cold. O.E. stertten io perish, die. 

604. sound, strait. 

61 1. Medusa, one of the three Gorgons ; the one most mentioned 
in classical writers. Her hair being changed into serpents by Athene, 
her appearance became so terrible that all who looked at her were 
changed into stone. See the allusion in Comus, 447, to "that snaky- 
headed Gorgon shield" worn by Athene, and cf. the note on X. 526, 527. 
So Gray, Adversity, 35, " Not in thy Gorgon terrors clad." 

612 14. According to legend, Tantalus, for divulging the secrets 
of Zeus, was *' punished in the lower world by being afflicted with a 
raging thirst, and at the same time placed in the midst of a lake, the 
waters of which always receded from him as soon as he attempted to 
drink them " (Class. Diet.). See S. A. 500, 501. 

615 18. See i. 733, note, first, for the first time, found no rest', 
editors compare Mat. xii. 43, Luke xi. 24. 

620. Alp ; used of any high snow-capped mountain. 

621. The number of monosyllables suggests variety, i.e. of scenery. 
625. prodigious, unnatural, monstrous. 

628. Cf. x. 524 (for rhythm) and Comus, 517. Hesiod mentions 
three Gorgons, daughters of Phorcys, monsters with wings and brazen 
claws, and hissing serpents, instead of hair, on their heads. The 
Lernean Hydra was a serpent with nine heads that ravaged the 
country near Argos ; slain by Hercules (his 2nd ' labour '). In Of 
Reformation in England, n, M. has the phrase "a continual hydra of 



NOTES, 
mischief and molestation," f. W. . 4 ,r. See also his Sonnet to 






, ,, 

*,,, ^cr, 5* x^cupa (* vi. 181), i.e. part lion, par 
dragon part goat. M. mentions these three monsters together because 
Vergil (* H . vi. ,87-89) and Tasso (iv. 5) had done the same. 

634. shaves, skims ; cf. radit iter liquidttm^neid v. 217. 

635. concave, roof. 

636. -What simile was ever so vast as this?" (Tennyson). His 
other favourite simile in Paradise Lost was "the gunpowder one" 
(iv. 814-19). Note here how fully the simile is worked out beyond 
the precise point of comparison (see 488, note): how also the 

roper names convey an impression of mysterious remoteness (see 

great similes are introduced with a 



637-40. hangs, i.e. seems to the distant spectator to be in the 
wes U t at tST^'f* 1 " thC trade - winds > -hich blow from east to 

tTan fe s ^r 6 f T^ " < Bradshaw ) > Awards <M M. 
sfers trading from the wind to the sea. ,,, i.e. together, so as to 
fo. seen from far, a single object-like the single figure of Satan. 

M had m his mind's eye a fleet of East Indiamen (Newton). The 
importance of the East Indian trade, especially the Dutch, is felt in 
Vyte^AnnusZhrabilis. cf. especially stanzas 2, 3, 4 , , ' and L? 
with its picture of merchantmen "doubling the bapt" (cf.^r) Cf 
also Marvell's description of the merchant ships sunk in the Thames to 
prevent the victorious Dutch going further up the river in SfflJ 
Instwctions to a Painter, 66074) 





th 3 , 9 ' J? nat t ^ Tid re > tW f the M Iuccas 

"MO luclt" a ' C "f Pelag ' C J OSe t0gether< Hcxham dCSCribeS the 
abunda f n T thr U 2 hout th world, in regard of the 
abundance of all sorts of sweete spices, but especially for the Cloue! 

y 



- 



640. rt w the ships. >^ ; used similarly of the sea by Shake 
speare eg. in A Midsummer- Ni g kts Dream, I i; J u Marking 
embarked traders on the flood." 

4I; ^ r anCG ^ thC map WU1 Sh w that Milton use * " the wide 
i '" S6a) = the Indlan Ocean ~ tha t -, the ocean east* 
is was m accordance with classical usage, Ethiopia being 
P. L. 

27 



41 8 PARADISE LOST. BOOK II. 

limited to the only part of Africa south of the Red Sea which the 
ancients knew, namely, its eastern coast. Gradually the use of the term 
"Ethiopia" expanded with the progress of Portuguese geographical 
discovery westward, until it applied to the vast region stretching from 
ocean to ocean. And the name " Ethiopia Sea" was transferred from 
the sea washing its eastern shores, which had come to be known as the 
"Indian Ocean" (Mare Indicum), to the sea on its western side. 
Thus in Hexham's Mercator, in the map of Africa, I find the name 
Oceamis JEthiopicus given to the sea west of Africa what we call 
the 'South Atlantic'; and in the letterpress the terms "^Ethiopicke 
Ocean," ".Ethiopicke Sea," are always used so. The same is the case 
in Heylin's map of Africa ; while speaking of the Atlantic, he says, 
"some parts hereof, which wash the Westerne Shores of (Ethiopia 
Inferior, be called the (Ethiopick Ocean" (Cosmography, Lib. iv. 71). 
One can scarce do else than conclude that for Milton's readers the 
title Ethiopian might more naturally have meant the South Atlantic 
(or western sea), not the Indian Ocean ( = Oceanus Orientalis in 
Mercator}. 

641, 642. Cape, of Good Hope, stemming, pressing forward, i.e. 
breasting the waves; cf. Juli us Ccesar, i. 2. 109. the pole, the South 
Pole. 

643 48. Cf. 434 37. For nine as a sacred number, see I. 50. 
impaled, encircled. The double alliteration (i...j and p...p) has a fine 
effect of emphasis. 

648 73. The basis of the allegory of Sin and Death lies, appro- 
priately, in Scripture: "Then when lust hath conceived, it bringeth 
forth sin : and sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth death, "James i. 15. 
In ix. 12 Death is called the "shadow" of Sin, and in the poem we never 
meet with them apart. How far M. means us to read an allegorical 
meaning into his description is hard to say. I doubt, e.g., whether the 
" yelling monsters " (795) should be regarded as typifying " the mental 
torments that are the consequence of sin" (Keightley). To me they 
seem to be introduced without allegorical intent partly because they 
intensify the element of mere horror, partly for the sake of the literary 
parallel. On the other hand, the "mortal sting" is plainly symbolical ; 
cf. i Cor. xv. 56. 

650. the one. Milton's figure of Sin is own sister to Spenser's Error 
( The Faerie Queene, I. i. 14, 15) and Phineas Fletcher's Hamartia or Sin 
(The Purple Island, XII. 27 cf. also his Apollyonists, i. 10 et seq.} 
their common origin being the classical accounts of Scylla, notably 
Ovid's (Metamorphoses XIV.) and Vergil's (sEneid in. 424 et seq.). 
It is therefore as a study in a familiar style, not as a fresh creation, 



NOTES. 



419 



that the picture should be viewed. So with his figure of Death. The 
subject of his poem, in itself, supplied him with few characters. 
651, 652. So Hesiod describes Echidna, Thcogony 298. 
voluminous ; perhaps with the literal sense 'in rolls or folds ' (Lat. 
volumen, from volvere, 4 to roll'); cf. Pope, Windsor Forest, "The silver 
eel in shining volumes roll'd." So in Dryden's Annus Mirabilis, st. 123. 
6 5456. cry, pack. Cerberean, as of Cerberus, the many-headed 
dog that guarded the entrance to Hades, list, wished, chose. 

65961. According to the legend, Circe threw magic herbs into 
the waters where Scylla bathed, so that she was changed in the way 
M. implies. See Bacon's application of the myth in The Advancement 
of Learning, i. 4. 6. abhorred, to be abhorred. Calabria, in South 
Italy. Trinacria, Sicily, so called from its triangular shape. 

662. the night-hag ; probably Hecate, the goddess of sorcery, is 
meant. Cf. Macbeth, ill. 5 (from which M. quotes in Comus, 1017), 
especially 20, where Hecate says, " I am for the air," and Dryden, 
Annus Mirabilis, st. 248. See Comus, 135. 

called, i.e. invoked to take part in rites ; cf. Macbeth, in. 5. 8 and 
34 ("Hark! I am call'd "). 

664. infant blood; alluding to an ancient superstition. When the 
witches in Jonson's Masque of Queens assemble and relate what they 
have been doing, one says : " Under a cradle I did creep, By day ; and 
when the child was asleep, At night I sucked the breath " ; whereto the 
next : " I had a dagger : what did I with that? Killed an infant." In 
the footnote Jonson adds, "Their killing of infants is common... 
Sprenger reports that a witch confessed to have killed above forty 
infants... which she had offered to the devil"; and then he cites 
authorities, e.g. Horace, Epod. V. Cf., perhaps, Macbeth, iv. i. 30. 

to dance-, like the witches in Macbeth ; cf. iv. i. 132, stage-direction, 
"The Witches dance, and then vanish, with Hecate." So Jonson 
makes his witches, in the midst of their rites, fall "into a sudden 
magical dance "commenting that this is in accordance with tradition 
(Masque of Queens'). Upon the significance of the custom, see Tylor's 
Primitive Culture, n. 133. 

665. Lapland 'was traditionally a home of witchcraft ; cf. Burton's 
Anatomy, i. ii. i, 2 ("Digression of Spirits"), The Comedy of Errors, iv. 
3. u, "Lapland sorcerers," and Hudibras, in. i. 113, u 4 . Heylyn 
calls the Laplanders "great sorcerers" (Cosmography, n. 122). Their 
chief instrument of divination was an oval cylinder or drum figured with 
various designs, notably of the moon and heavenly bodies. See "Reg- 
nard's Journey to Lapland" (1681), which contains a full account of 
the ' sorcerers ' and their incantations ; also the narrative of Leems 

272 



420 PARADISE LOST. BOOK II. 

(1767), on the " Magic Arts of the Laplanders" (both in Pinkerton's 
Voyages, 1808, vol. I.)- 

665, 666. The belief that the moon (see I. 785, 786) and 
heavenly bodies are affected by magic is very old and widespread. 
Cf. Pliny, Nat. Hist. II. xii. i, "As for the Moone, mortall men 
imagine that by Magicke sorcerie, and charms, she is inchaunted" 
(Philemon Holland's translation, 1601). See Vergil, EcL vin. 69, 

*-Ovid, Metamorphoses vn. 192 et seq., Horace, Epod. v. 45, 46. Mar- 
lowe's Doctor Faustus claims (ill. 38) that Mephistophilis must do 

"whatever Faustus shall command, 
Be it to make the moon drop from her sphere." 
So in Fairfax, Tasso, IX. 15, " The moon and stars for fear of spirites 
were fled," and xni. 9. 

labouring; cf. Cowper (translating Milton's Italian sonnet to 
Diodati), " And from her sphere draw down the labouring moon." 
So Lat. adores = 'eclipse,' laborare, 'to suffer eclipse.' Cf. Vergil, 
Georg. II. 478, defectus soils varies, lunaque labores, 

666. the other Shape. Joseph Warton thought that Milton owed 
the "person of Death" to the 6dvaros of Euripides in the Alcestis ; 
cf. the Sonnet, " On his Deceased Wife." But Death as a personified 
figure had been described by Spenser (F. Q. vn. 7. 46), and introduced 
(as Todd noted) in Morality and early Elizabethan plays. I daresay 
too that a similar allegorical presentment might be found in some 
popular Book of Emblems, or in the famous wood-cuts, The Dance of 
Death (1538). In any case we must remember that the tendency to 
personify (fostered by the very important influence ot the Morality- plays 
and, later, of the Masque) was a characteristic of early i7th century 
poetry. Roughly it may be said that this allegorising habit came from 
the Latin tendency to personify abstract words, the two great masters 
of it being Dante and Spenser. 

670. Cf. Homer's ipefufv VVKT <?oiK<6s, Od. xi. 605 (Newton). 

672. The "dart" of Death, a symbol of the force by which humanity 
is laid low, is mentioned in XI. 491. 

what seemed. In his fine criticism of this passage Coleridge notes 
how the abstract vagueness of such description appeals to the imagina- 
tion with a subtle force which concrete, more clearly defined, imagery 
would lack altogether. Cf. iv. 990. 

673. a kingly crown ; cf.Job xviii. 14, Rev. vi. i. 

677. admired, wondered ; cf. i. 690. 

678, 679. Strictly, the construction includes "God and his Son" 
among "created things"; but the sense is clear. 

686, 687. taste, i.e. its effects. Hell-born! echoed in 697. 



NOTES. 421 

688. Goblin, demon, evil spirit. Cowper remarks on the variety of 
titles; for Death: "the poet. ..seems to exhaust both invention and 
language for subtle appellations." 

692. See Rev. xii. 4, and cf. V. 710, VI. 156. In ix. 141, 142 
Satan boasts that his followers were "well nigh half" the angels. Their 
number was a point of dispute among the Schoolmen. 

693. conjured, sworn together (conjuratt). 

695. waste, spend, pass; cf. The Tempest, v. 302. 

701. -whip of scorpions. Cf. I Kings xii. ir. 

706. deform = 'L2i.. deformis, 'hideous, unsightly.' 

706 n. Cf. IV. 985 et seq. (Satan's meeting with Gabriel). 

708. The comparison of a warrior clad in armour to a comet 
is at least as old as the ALneid (x. 272, 273), and is finely em- 
ployed by Tasso (n. 52). The vast scale of the simile here conveys a 
profound impression of Satan's majesty. 

709. Ophiuchus, a constellation of the northern (cf. " arctic") hemi- 
sphere, consisting of some 80 stars and extending about forty degrees in 
length : lit. 'the Serpent-holder,' from Gk. o0ts, 'a snake' and fyw, 
Lat. Anguitenens or Serpentarius ; cf. Hey wood's Hierarchie (p. 124), 
and for an apt illustration of the simile, Henry More's Song of the Soul'. 

"Ye flaming comets wandering on high, 
And new-fixt starres found in that Circle blue, 
The one espide in glittering Cassiopie, 
The other near to Ophiuchus high." 

710. 711. The appearance of a comet was traditionally held an 
omen, generally of disaster. Cf. a passage in Batman vppon Bartho- 
lome (1582), viii. 32, curiously like this: " Cometa is a starre beclipped 
with burning gleames...and 'is sodeinly bred and betokeneth changing 
of kings, and is a token of pestilence or of war.., and. they spread their 
beames toward the North " ( = " arctic sky "). horrid hair, i. e. the tail 
of the comet ( = Ko^rrjs, 'long-haired,' from c6^w;, 'hair'). Cf. 
i Henry VI. I. i. 2, 3 : 

"Comets, importing change of times and states, 
Brandish your crystal tresses in the sky." 

711. Cf. the encounter of Michael and Satan in the battle in 
Heaven, compared to the clash of two planets, VI. 310 15. 

715, 716. Cf. Dryden: 

"Lightning and thunder (heaven's artillery] 

As harbingers before th' Almighty fly." 

But the phrase was common. Caspian; chosen as typical in poets 
of a tempestuous region; cf. Tasso VI. 38, The Faerie Qucene, II. 
7. 14. 



422 PARADISE LOST. BOOK II. 

719. so, thus; completing the simile; cf. 947, I. 209, 311, 775. 
that, so that; a constant use in M. Cf. The Tempest, I. 2. 370, 371: 

"[I'll] make thee roar, 
That beasts shall tremble at thy din." 

722. foe, i.e. Christ. See i Cor. xv. 25, 26, Heb. ii. 14. 

730. and knoufst, though knowing; in original eds. not a question. 

739. spares to, refrains from; cf. Lat. parcere followed by infinitive. 
So M. in prose; cf. Of Reformation in England, n, "neither doth the 
author spare to record," P. W. II. 41 r. 

746. Phineas Fletcher in his Apollyonists has the line, "The 
Porter to th' infernall gate is Sin." 

74951. By a fitting stroke of allegory, the birth of Sin is made 
to synchronise with the first sign of disobedience in Heaven. 

755 58' As Athene sprang from the head of Zeus. 

787 89. Cf. Georgic iv. 525 27 (with Pope's imitation, St Cecilia's 
Day, vi.), where the river-banks re-echo the name 'Eurydice'; also 
Tennyson's Merlin and Vivien (end). Other Vergilian references are 
Eclogue vi. 43, 44, &neid n. 53. 

809. So Satan recognises Fate as the highest power (l. 116, note). 

813. To temper metal is to harden it by cooling after it has been 
heated; cf. I. 285, VI. 322. mortal dint, deadly blow. 

815. lore, lesson, what he had to learn (lore and learn cognate). 
Note the change in his tone. When in bk. ix. Eve tells (659 63) 
Satan that she may not touch the forbidden fruit under pain of death, 
Satan affects (695) not to know what death is. He is "the father 
of lies." 

8 1 8. pledge', cf. the use of Lat. pignus. 

823. Cf. vi. 877 (note). 

825. pretences, claims; or ' designs, ambitions'; cf. vi. 421. 

829. unfounded, bottomless, lit. 'having no base' (L,o...fundus). 

830. foretold; see 34553. 
833. purlieus, outskirts. 

836, 837. surcharged, overfull, broils, turmoils; Fr. broiiiller. 

839 44. Cf. x. 397 409, where after the Temptation Satan bids 
Sin and Death make Mankind their prey and the Earth their posses- 
sion "There dwell and reign in bliss." See Psalm xlix. 14. 

842. buxom, yielding. Cf. V. 270, and The Faerie Qucene, 
I. ii. 37, "And therewith scourge the buxome aire so sore." The 
phrase is a reminiscence, as Keightley noted, of Horace's pete cedentem 
['yielding'] aera disco (Sat. II. 2. 13). embalmed, made fragrant j 
cf. balmy = 'fragrant,' from balm = ' aromatic resin or oil.' 

847. famine, hunger ; " the cause for the efrect " (Cowper). 



NOTES. 423 

855. might; the edition of 1678 (the third) has wight (from 
613?). 

868. Homer's 8eol pe?a fu>oi>rej, Iliad VI. 138; cf. Counts, 26, 
and Tennyson, (Enone: 

"the Gods who have attain'd 
Rest in a happy place and quiet seats 
Above the thunder, with undying bliss." 
There is a similar passage in The Lotos-Eaters, 8. 

869. As the Son sits at the right hand of the Father (v. 606, 
vi. 892); profane sarcasm seems intended. 

880. The sound, especially the r sound, echoes the sense ; see II. 
594. 595. note. 

883, 884. That Sin cannot close the gates is symbolical. 
885. that, so that ; cf. 719. 

889. redounding, in clouds, volleys; Lat. redundare, 'to overflow.' 

890. In this picture of Chaos, to be compared with Ovid's, Metamor- 
phoses I. 5 20, Milton labours (as Masson notes) to convey to the reader 
an impression of the utter confusion of the scene described: heaping image 
on image, idea on idea, by which the imagination may be baffled (e.g. 
in 892 94), and the mind bewildered with an insistent sense of the 
inconceivable. And the rhythm heightens the effect. It is to this part 
of P. L. that M. alludes in ill. 1521. 

891. "One would think the deep to be hoary," y^xli. 32. Perhaps 
secrets = ' secret places,' Lat. secreta, here and again in 972 (Newton). 

894 96. "All the ancient naturalists [i.e. men of science], philo- 
sophers, and poets held that Chaos was the first principle of all things ; 
and the poets particularly make Night a Goddess, and represent Night 
or darkness, and Chaos or confusion, as exercising uncontrolled dominion 
from the beginning" (Newton). But in personifying Chaos as a distinct 
divinity Milton seems to have extended the classical conception. His 
epithets referring to the antiquity of Night ("the ancestress of gods 
and men") are drawn from the classics. (See Osgood, s.v. "Chaos" 
and "Night.") Nature, the created Universe. 

898. The four "elements" are meant, Milton's terms for them 
being, I suppose, proverbial ; cf. Drummond of Hawthornden, Floivers 
of Sion ("The Muses' Library" edition of Drummond's Works, n. 9). 
See 274, 275, note, 912, in. 714, 715 (closely parallel); and cf. Dryden, 
St Cecilia's Day, i 10 : 

"From harmony, from heav'nly harmony 
This universal frame [cf. 924] began. 
When Nature underneath a heap 
Of jarring atoms lay, 



424 PARADISE LOST. BOOK II. 

And could not heave her head, 

The tuneful voice was heard from high: 

Arise, ye more than dead. 
Then cold and hot and moist and dry 
In order to their stations leap, 

And Musick's pow'r obey." 

899. mastery. The original editions have the curious form 
Maistrie, up till the fourth (iGSS), which changes to Mas fry. 

900. embryon, embryo; the semina rerum of Lucretius. 

903, 904. unnumbered, innumerable. Barca...Cyrene, the chief 
cities of Cyrenaica in northern Africa, a region often treated as typical 
of sand. Cf. Fairfax, 7asso, XVII. 5, "From Syria's coasts as far as 
Cirene sands." 

905, 906. levied, raised (Fr. lever), but also with the notion 'to levy 
troops' cf. "warring winds"; it qualifies sands, poise, give weight to 
(Fr. peser). their... wings, i.e. of the winds, lighter, which would be 
too light but for the sand. 

906, 907. i.e. the element, or champion, to whom for the moment 
most atoms cling, is victor. 

91027. Satan's pause is artfully contrived so as to enable the 
poet to describe Chaos without seeming to delay the narrative 
(Richardson). 

911. As Nature, i.e. the Universe, was born out of Chaos (= "this 
Abyss"), so may she at last fall back again into Chaos. He is varying 
an old thought, that all things proceed from Nature and, perishing, pass 
back into Nature. Cf. Borneo and Juliet, II. 3. 9, 10 : 

"The earth that's nature's mother is her tomb; 
What is her burying grave that is her womb " ; 
and Tennyson, Lucretius, "the womb and tomb of all, Great Nature" 
(from Lucretius V. 260, omniparens eadem rerum commune sepulcrum). 
The idea occurs also in Shakespeare's 86th Sonnet. 

918, 919. i.e. standing looked, frith, channel, estuary, firth. 

921, 922. Cf. Vergil's sic parvis componcre magna solebam, Eel. I. 
24, and Georg. IV. 176, si parva licet componere magnis; so in vi. 310, 
311, x. 306, P. R. iv. 563, 564. Bellona, the goddess of war ; cf. Mac- 
beth, I. 2. 54. 

923. engines ; probably cannon are meant. 

924. frame, fabric, structure. 

927. steadfast, i.e. according to the Ptolemaic system; cf. VIII. 32 
("the sedentary Earth"), vans, wings, Ital. vanni. 

933. pennons, i.e. pinions, Lat. pentue. 

934. fathom ; in the original edition fadom (cf. the Middle E. form 



NOTES. 425 

fadme), and M. himself evidently intended this spelling, since the MS. of 
Comus (in his own beautiful handwriting) has the cancelled line " And 
halfe the slow unf adorn' d poole of styx " (i.e. Styx). The d sound gives 
a stronger sense of depth. 

937. instinct, filled, charged with, nitre, saltpetre. 

939. Syrtis, quicksand. 

941. consistence, substance or mixture, of sea and land. 

943 47. Cf. Herodotus in. 116, "The northern parts of Europe 
are very much richer in gold than any other region : but how it is pro- 
cured I have no certain knowledge. The story runs, that the one-eyed 
Arimaspi purloin it from the griffins" (Rawlinson) ; and IV. 13, 27, where 
he speaks of "the gold-guarding (xpwo0i5Xaces) griffins." Pliny (Nat. 
Hist. vil. 2) says that these Arimaspi live near the Scythians, "toward 
the pole Arkticke," and that they "maintaine warre ordinarily about 
the mettall mines of gold, especially with griffons, a kind of wild beasts 
that flie, and use to fetch gold out of the veines of those mines : which 
savage beasts strive as eagerly to keepe and hold those golden mines, as 
the Arimaspians to disseize them thereof, and to get away the gold from 
them" (Philemon Holland's translation, 1601, I. 154). See Lucan, 
Pharsalia in. 280, vn. 756. 

The legend, which Sir Thomas Browne places among his Vulgar 
Errors, in. xi., may have had some connection with the fact that gold 
is found in the Ural mountains near which the Arismaspi were thought 
to dwell. 

943. gryphon, a mythic monster, a sort of chimaera; "sum men seyn 
that thei han the body upward as an eagle, and benethe as a lyoune.... 
But a griffoun hathe the body more gret, and is more strong thanne 
viij. lyouns, and more gret and strongere than an c (i.e. 100) egles, 
suche as we han amonges us" Sir John Mandeville, who knew a 
country where the "griffoun" was quite common. See The Faerie 
Queene, I. 5. 8. Jonson makes it a type of "swiftness and strength," 
Masque of Queens. 

945. Herodotus (iv. 27) says that the name Arimaspi means 
* one-eyed,' "in the Scythian language." 

948. dense, or rare, i.e. matter now thick, packed close now thin; 
raro e denso, as Dante says (Paradise, II. 67, xxil. 141); "dense," or 
" condense " (vi. 353), and "rare" are exact opposites. The rhythm 
expresses the difficulty of Satan's journey. 

958) 959- i.e. the nearest way to the point where darkness borders 
on light. There should be no comma after "lies." 

959 67. This picture of the palace of Chaos is as conventional and 
classical as that of Sin. Cf. the cave of Death, thronged with person- 
ified Shapes of evil and disease (xi. 47793) ; or the abode of Murder 



426 PARADISE LOST. BOOK II. 

in Milton's Latin poem on the Gunpowder plot, ; Quintum Norembris, 
139 54. So Spenser describes the palace of Pluto: Payne and Strife 
at his side: Revenge, Treason, Hate hard by: Care guarding the door 
(The Faerie Queene, II. 7. 21 25). Such passages owe their similarity 
to their common origin, viz. Vergil's account of the realm of Pluto, 
JEneid vi. 273 81. Of 959 63 Pope has a most felicitous parody in 
The Dunciad, iv. (ad fin.)  see also canto I. where he makes Dulness 
the "Daughter of Chaos and eternal Night." Indeed, all Pope's bur- 
lesque of epic machinery and style, in The Rape of the Lock and The 
Dunciad, derives, I think, more from Paradise Lost than from the 
classics. The same Miltonic influence is strongly felt in Gray's satirical 
Hymn to Ignorance, which starts, as his editors note, with a humorous 
echo of P. L. I. 250. 

960, 961. pavilion, palace; see Psalm xviii. n. wide .. .wasteful 
( = vast, desolate), Milton's favourite form of alliteration. Cf. Nat. Ode, 
51, 64, Arcades, 47, Lycidas, 13, and compounds of wide', see VI. 253, 
XI. 121, 487,  Pcnseroso, 75. 

962. In Euripides, Ion 1150, AeXdxTreTrXos is said of night. 

963. consort ; in Hesiod (Theogony 123) Night is the daughter of 
Chaos. It has been said that Milton sometimes makes his own 
mythology, e.g. in his genealogy of Mirth, L 1 Allegro,  8. 

964. Orcus, Ades Lat. and Greek names of Pluto, god of Hell. 
964, 965. name of Demogorgon ^DeinogorgQn. himself; a Latinism. 

Demogorgon, a deity supposed to be alluded to by Lucan, Pharsalia VI. 
744, and said to be first mentioned by name by Lactantius (fourth 
century A.D.) ; also to be mentioned by the Italian writers, Boccaccio, 
Boiardo, Tasso, and Ariosto. 

Spenser makes Demogorgon the lord of Chaos "Downe in the 
bottome of the deepe Abysse" The Faerie Qiteene, iv. 2. 47; Marlowe 
recognises him as co-ruler with Beelzebub of the nether world, Faustus, 
III. 18; Greene speaks of "Demogorgon, master of the fates," Friar 
Bacon, xi. no, and "Demogorgon, ruler of the fates," Orlando Furioso 
and he is an important character in Shelley's Prometheus Unbound. 
Apparently too he is identical with the " Great Gorgon prince of dark- 
ness and dead night," at the sound of whose name "Cocytus quakes, 
and Styx is put to flight" (The Faerie Queene, i. i. 37). The name has 
been considered a corruption of d-rjjjuovpyus ; it is at least noticeable 
that Demogorgon became the patron of alchemists. Thus Howell, 
in his Instructions for Forraine Travell, calls alchemists "devout 
Naturalists and Disciples of Demogorgon " (Arber's ed., p. 81). 

967. "A thousand busy tongues the goddess bears" Pope de- 
scribing Fame (Temple of Fame). 

977. confine with, border on. 



NOTES. 427 

983-86. Cf. iv. 66567. 

988. Anarch ; cf. The Dttnciad, iv. 655. 

989. incomposed, disturbed, discomposed (Lat. incompositus). 
99398. See the closely parallel passage, vi. 871 74. 

1001. our; so the original editions; changed by some to your. But 
by our Chaos proclaims himself an ally with Satan against their common 
foe : their cause is the same. 

1004, IO 5- Heaven, the sky of this world, chain  see 1051. 

1006. Heaven ; here the Empyrean is meant. 

1007 9. Chaos, we see, directs Satan's course, as he had been 
asked (980), and wishes him good speed. Yet when Satan, after the 
Temptation, descends to Hell and announces to his followers the result 
of his mission (x. 460 et seq.}, he pretends that Chaos had "fiercely 
opposed" (478) his journey. 

ion. Cf. xi. 750. 

1017, 1018. Argo, the vessel in which Jason and the 50 Argonauts 
sailed to JEa. (afterwards called Colchis) to fetch the golden fleece. 
Bosporus, the Thracian Bosporus, now the Straits of Constantinople ; 
connecting the Propontis (Sea of Marmora) with the Pontus Euxinus 
(Black Sea). At its eastern entrance, i.e. where it opens into the 
Black Sea, stood two rocks, one on either side, the Symplegades, so 
called (from Gk. vvv + TrX^o-o-ew, 'to strike'), because when a ship was 
passing through they clashed together and crushed it. By the advice 
of the seer Phineus and the help of Hera, the Argonauts managed to 
pass, and thenceforth the rocks were fixed motionless. Juvenal calls 
them concurrentia saxa (Sat. xv. 19), i.e. "justling." 

1019, 1020. Scylla (660) and Charybdis were two rocks, close 
together, in the Straits of Messina between Italy and Sicily. The 
currents or whirlpools were so strong that sailors seeking to avoid 
the one rock were generally driven on the other : whence the proverbial 
line, from the Alexandreis of Philip Gaultier, incidis in Scyllam cupiens 
vitare Charybdim. Cf. Milton's pamphlet the Animadversions ', 4 : 
"you have rowed yourself fairly between the Scylla and Charybdis, 
either of impudence or nonsense," P. W. ill. 67. It is a very common 
poetic allusion ; cf. The Merchant of Venice, ill. 5. 18 20. 

larboard, the left side of a ship; Ulysses, by steering to the left, 
nearer to Scylla, thus avoided Charybdis on his right. 

1028. a bridge; see X. 293 et seq. 

1032, 1033. For the thought that Guardian Angels watch over men, 
see Comus, 21620, 45369, S. A. 1431. In The Christian Doctrine, 
i. 9, Milton deals with the ministry on earth of Angels. Todd quotes 
Richard III. v. 3. 175, "God and good angels fight on Richmond's side." 



428 PARADISE LOST. BOOK II. 

1034. Cf. IX. 107 (said of the stars), and 192. sacred; since "God 
is light," in. 3. Cf. Dante's lume santo in the Paradiso, IX. 7. 

1037. glimmering dawn. Cf. Lycidas, 26, where the MS. shows 
that M. first wrote " Under the glimmering eyelids of the morne," but 
substituted opening which heightens the personification. 

1039. her outmost works, i.e. Nature's. 

1042 44. holds, makes for; cf. Lat. tenere, which implies, also, 
reaching a destination (portum, terrain etc.). 

1048. undetermined qualifying heaven. "Its extent was such that 
from the portion that was seen the eye could not determine whether its 
margin was straight or curved" (Keightley). See x. 381. "Take a 
segment of a great circle, and you shall doubt whether it be straight or no " 
(Selden, Table-Talk, Reynolds' ed., p. 198). 

1050. living sapphire; again in IV. 605. M. is fond of this use of 
living, exactly = ' vivid.' Cf. Dante's la viva luce of Paradise (xxill. 31, 
xxxi. 46), and vivo hime (xxxni. no). 

1051. golden chain; alluding to Homer's story of the golden chain 
of Zeus, suspended from Heaven, whereby he can draw up the gods, 
and the earth and sea, and the whole universe, though they cannot draw 
him down (Iliad vili. 18 27). Cf. Chapman, Shadow of Night, "The 
golden chain of Homer's high device." Plato (Theatetus 153 c) inter- 
prets it of the Sun. It is curious to note how poets apply the story. 
Spenser uses it of the chain of Ambition by which men strive to rise in 
the world (The Faerie Quecne, II. 7. 46, 47). Dryden, in his character 
of "The Good Parson," says: 

"For, letting down the golden chain from high, 

He drew his audience upward to the sky." 

Milton himself in his Latin piece De Spherarum Concentu says that 
Homer meant the golden chain as a symbol of the chain of connection 
and design that runs through the universe ; and Pope follows him 
(Essay on Man, I. 33, 34) : 

"Is the great chain that draws all to agree, 

And drawn supports, upheld by God or thee?" 

Jonson (Masque of Hymen see his note) writes of marriage, "Such was 
the golden chain let down from heaven"; and Tennyson of prayer 
(Morte D* Arthur] : 

"For so the whole round earth is every way 

Bound by gold chains about the feet of God." 

Among prose-references we may add Bacon, The Advancement of 
Learning, I. i. 3, and 11. vi. I ("that excellent and divine fable of the 
golden chain"); Drummond of Hawthornden's Platonic discourse on 
Death entitled A Cypress Grove (1623) see "The Muses' Library" ed., 



NOTES. 429 

II. 265 ; and Sir Thomas Browne : " There is a nearer way to heaven 
than Homer's chain" (Religio Medici, i. xviii.). 

1052, 1053. i.e. the Universe, hung in space, looked in comparison 
with the Empyrean as small as some minor star which being close to 
the moon's superior light seems insignificant. Cf. Tennyson : 

"a candle in the sun 

Is all but smoke a star beside the moon 
Is all but lost" (Queen Mary, v. i). 

"This pendent world," as Newton notes, cannot mean the Earth, 
which Satan does not see till he has gained entrance through the outer 
surface of the Universe (ill. 498 543). 

In IV. 1000 M. uses a similar expression "the pendulous round 
Earth" in a different sense. There the Earth itself is meant, and 
"pendulous" expresses its relation ("self-balanced," VII. 242) to 
surrounding space within the Universe, 



BOOK III. 

The exordium (i 55), apart from its beauty of thought and diction, 
has a twofold interest personal, in that it is touched with the pathos 
of Milton's resignation under his affliction of blindness ; artistic, in that 
it is a fitting prelude to a fresh development in the action of the poem. 
Hitherto the scene has been the gloomy regions of Hell or Chaos : now 
our imagination is lifted to the Empyrean and the new-created Universe, 
still in its primal splendour. The transition from darkness to light is 
aptly marked by this celebrated introduction. 

Lines i, 2 and 21 26 are (I believe) the first lines quoted from 
Paradise Lost in any work by a writer contemporary with Milton. They 
are cited contemptuously in The Transproser Rehearsed, or the Fifth Act 
of Mr Bayes's Play, Oxford, 1673, by Richard Leigh of Queen's College 
(see Notes and Queries, IV. i. 456, 457) ; the title of which is an obvious 
echo of MarvelFs controversy with Parker (see p. 366). 

1, 2. Either Light was subsequent to the Deity, as being the first 
thing created by Him, or Light existed from Eternity equally with 
Him. See yil. 243 52 (with notes). 

fi,rst-born', cf. vn. 244, and S. A. 70, "Light, the prime work of 
God, to me is extinct," and 83, "O first-created beam." 

It has been well said that there is something peculiarly personal and 
sensitive in Milton's references to light. 

2, 3. i.e. or may I, without blame, call ("express") thee co-eternal 
with the Deity? since  he gives his reasons (from Scripture) for 



430 PARADISE LOST. BOOK III. 

terming Light "co-eternal." Cf. i John i. 5, "God is light," and 
i Tim. vi. 16, "Who only hath immortality dwelling in the light 
which no man can approach unto." 

4. The passage in Thomson's Slimmer beginning, " How shall 
I then attempt to sing," is a typical example of the spell that Milton 
exercised over him and his contemporaries, especially in the sphere of 
blank verse. 

7. hear'st thou rather, dost thou prefer to be called ? A classicism; 
cf. Gk. AcXtfeij', Lat. audire, as in Horace's seu Jane libentius audis 
(Sat. II. vi. 20). So M. in his Lat. poems, e.g. in the Epitaphium 
Damonis, 209, sive ceqnior audis  Diodotus; also in his prose- works, 
e.g. in Areopagitica, " what more national corruption, for which England 
hears ill abroad [cacws KXrfet, male audif, than household gluttony?" 
(P. W. n. 73)- 

9 12. Genesis i. 3 5. wert', an old preterite, cognate with was. 

10. invest, enwrap; Lat. investire. Cf. i. 208. 

12. won from the... infinite, formed out of the realm of Chaos. 

void, i.e. of form, not of matter. 

13 15. wing... flight. His favourite metaphor, "wing "(like penna) 
being a natural emblem of that which uplifts the poet's genius. Cf. 1.14. 

14. the Stygian pool, i.e. Hell. The phrase occurs in a cancelled 
line (early) of the Comus MS. Dante speaks of himself as having passed 
"from the deepest pool iiaW hifima lacuna'} of the universe," i.e. 
from Inferno, up to Paradise (Paradiso, xxxni. 22 24). 

long detained ; the action of books I. and II. (up to 927) being laid in 
Hell. 

16. utter... darkness, of Hell, as always in M. (cf. I. 72, V. 614): 
middle darkness, of Chaos. M. means that in n. 629 1055 ^ e de- 
scribed the flight of Satan through Hell, and thence upward through 
Chaos towards Heaven, utter, outer. 

17. i.e. with loftier strains than those of the Orphic Hymn to 
Night (one of the poems of unknown authorship attributed to the 
mythic Orpheus). M. says "other," implying 'greater,' because he 
regarded himself as literally an inspired teacher perhaps in the same 
sense that the Hebrew prophets were inspired. See I. 17 26, note. 

19. the Heavenly Muse, Urania, the power whom he invokes 
at the beginning of the poem (i. 6). 

20, 21. An echo of sEneid VI. 126 29; cf. II. 432, 433. rare, 
seldom achieved, safe', carrying on the idea of "escaped" (14). 

25, 26. drop serene... dim sitffusion. See Appendix, pp. 682, 683. 
quenched-, the metaphor of putting out a light ; cf. S. A. 95. 
orbs ; used of the eye-balls ; cf. ociilorum orbes in ALneid XII. 
670, and Gk. KiJcXoi, e.g. in Sophocles, Antigone 974 



NOTES. 431 

26 29. His love of literature, in particular classical poetry, has 
not failed. He is still devoted to those ancient poets inspired by the 
Muses (note the plural here and contrast 19) who haunted the "hill" 
of Helicon, with its "clear springs" Aganippe and Hippocrene (where 
was the famous "grove" of the Muses), and Parnassus with the famed 
Castalian fountain. 

29. So Vergil (Georg. II. 476) describes himself as serving the 
Muses, ingenti percuss^ls amore. 

sacred '; in the general sense 'divine.' 

29 32. But his love of the classics is exceeded by his love of 
Scripture. "Sion hill" (i. 10), and "Siloa's brook' 1 '' (i. n) and the 
brook Kidron : these scenes and the literature associated with them 
the Psalms of David and the works of the singers of Israel are dearest 
to him. See the closely similar lines in bk. i. (6 13). For Milton's 
preference of sacred Hebrew poetry to classical, cf. P. R. iv. 346, 347, 
where he makes our Saviour say that the works of Greek poets 
"Will far be found unworthy to compare 

With Sion's songs, to all true tastes excelling." 

And in The Reason of Church Government, n (Preface), he pronounces 
"those frequent songs throughout the law and prophets... over all the 
kinds of lyric poesy... incomparable," P. W. II. 479. 

32. nightly. Milton was best inspired at night or daybreak. This 
is clear from vu. 28 30 and IX. 21 24. Newton in his Life of M. 
says that the poet's widow, "being asked... who the Muse was, replied 
it was God's grace, and the Holy Spirit that visited him nightly." 
(Cf. Shakespeare's famous 86th Sonnet!) Johnson refers to the statement 
in Richardson's Life of Milton (1734), that M. "would sometimes lie 
awake whole nights... and 'on a sudden his poetical faculty would 
rush upon him with an impetus^ and his daughter was immediately 
called to secure what came" (a similar story is told of Pope). 

nor sometimes forget, and constantly call to mind ; see v. 178, note. 

33. those other two, i.e. Thamyris and Maeonides, poets as well as 
"prophets" rather than Tiresias and Phineus, "prophets" alone. 
equalled... in fate, i.e. blind. 

34. i.e. and would that I might be equal ; a parenthesis. 

$o probably =Lat. sic introducing an imperative clause, i.e. as a 
formula of wishing; cf. Horace's sic te diva potens etc., Od. I. 3. i 4. 
M. apparently uses this Latin "formula of invocation" several times; 
cf. P. R. II. 125, Lycidas, 19. 

35. Thamyris ; according to Homer, Iliad II. 595 600, a Thracian 
bard, who, for boasting that he could surpass the Muses in song, was 
deprived of his sight and of the power of singing. Plato mentions him 
together with Orpheus twice (Laws vin. 829 E, Republic x. 620 A). 



 , 



432 PARADISE LOST. BOOK III. 

Maonides, i.e. Homer; called Maonides, either as a son of Mtzon, 
or as a native of M&onia, the ancient name of Lydia. Hence he is 
also called Mceonitts senex, and his poems the Mcconice chartce or 
Mceonium carmen, Spenser calls the praise of Queen Elizabeth an 
"Argument worthy of Mseonian quill" (The Faerie Queene, n. 10. 3). 
Pope ironically laments that he cannot do justice to the merits of 
George II. (Satires, v. 394, 395) : 

"Oh! could I mount on the Maeonian wing, 

Your arms, your actions, your repose to singl" 

See also the quotation from Wordsworth on p. 688. The tradition of 
Homer's blindness is mentioned as early as the Homeric Hymn to the 
Delian Apollo. 

36. 7zresias, the blind sooth-sayer of Thebes, famous through the 
CEdipus Rex of Sophocles and many other works down to Tennyson's 
Tiresias. In De Idea Platonica, 25, 26, M. refers to him as "the Theban 
seer whose blindness proved his best illumination " ; so in the Second 
Defence (P. W. I. 236), where he is speaking of his own affliction. 

Phineus, another blind prophet, king of Salmydessus in Thrace ; 
best known in connection with the Harpies (ALneid III. -211 13), from 
whose torments two of the Argonauts freed him. In his second Letter 
to Leonard Philaras (Sept. 28, 1654) M. compares himself with Phineus, 
quoting the account of the prophet's blindness in the Argonautica of 
Apollonius Rhodius. 

Dante was another sufferer, though from weakness of sight not 
blindness, and seems to allude similarly to the fact in the Inferno, II. 
97 98, where the note in the "Temple" edition gives other references, 
e.g. the Vita Nuova, XL. 27 34. 

38. numbers, verse, the wakeful bird, the nightingale, Milton's 
favourite bird, if we may judge by his many references to it. See IV. 
602, 603, *vii. 435, 436,  Penseroso, 56 64. 

44. human face divine  his favourite word-order; cf. 396, 439, 
692. See I. 733, note. 

45. Cf. I. 22, 23 ("what in me is dark" etc.). dark; an adj.= 
noun is common in M. ; cf. 380. 

50. and wisdom ...shut out; an absolute construction, added 
rather loosely as a sort of climax to the whole sentence. Cf. Lycidas, 
128, 129: 

" Besides what the grim wolf with privy paw 

Daily devours apace, and nothing said." 

This elliptical idiom occurs in Milton's prose-works. Cf. the Animad- 
versions, 4 : "seeing the power of Thy grace is not passed away with the 
primitive times, as fond and faithless men imagine, but Thy Kingdom is 
now at hand, and Thou standing at the door" (P. W. in. 72, 90). 



NOTES. 433 

55. His favourite claim (in some degree, traditional with epic 
poets) to peculiar inspiration and novelty of theme. 

57. Empyrean, Heaven, the abode of the Deity and his angels. 

60, 61. the Sanctities, the divine beings; abstract for concrete. 
Editors refer to 2 Henry IV. iv. 2. 11. 

61, 62. his sight, the sight of him. An allusion to the Visio 
Beatifica see I. 684. Hooker, speaking of the three types of 
"angelical actions," says that the first is "most delectable love, 
arising from the visible apprehension of the purity, glory and beauty 
of God, invisible save only unto spirits that are pure," Ecclesiastical 
Polity, i. iv. i. Cf. M. in The Christian Doctrine, I. 33, "Perfect 
glorification [of the righteous] consists in eternal life and perfect 
happiness, arising chiefly from the divine vision" Sir Thomas Browne 
has a fine passage on the idea (Christian Morals, ill. xv.)> and so has 
Drummond (A Cypress Grove), giving it a Platonic colouring ( Works, 
II. 277, 278). 

62 64. "Who being the brightness of his glory, and the express 
image of his person... sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on 
high," Hebrews i. 3. See 138 42, 384. 

69 76. The last lines of bk. II. described Satan reaching in his 
ascent from Hell the upper regions of Chaos and making his way 
towards the Empyrean, close to which he perceived the globe of this 
World hung in Chaos by that golden chain (n. 1051) which is fastened 
to the Empyrean. Now he has arrived at the "crystal battlements" 
(i. 742) that separate the Empyrean from Chaos, and is flying along 
them of course, on the outside. Below him lies the globe of the 
World ; he prepares to swoop down to its surface ; by 422 he has 
done so. 

70. the gulf , Chaos, " the main Abyss" (83). there, in Chaos. 

71. this side, i.e. the side nearest to the Empyrean. The realm of 
Night (personified) lies in Chaos, between Hell and the Empyrean. 
Into the upper regions of this realm penetrates the light reflected from 
the battlements of the Empyrean, and forms a kind of half-light, "a 
glimmering dawn" (n. 1037) what M. calls (72) a "dun" atmosphere, 
i.e. brownish, dusky (like Dante's ' aer bruno). See again 427 29. 

72. sudtimq = Lat. sublimis in its literal sense 'aloft'; cf. 
II. 528. 

73. The alliteration may be meant to indicate Satan's exhaustion. 

75. Viewed from outside, this Universe appeared to be a solid, 
spherical mass of land, without sky (the sky which, we see being 
supposed to be inside the "first convex" or outer crust). 

76. uncertain^ it being uncertain. This is an absolute construction 
P. L. 28 



434 PARADISE LOST. BOOK III. 

modelled on the elliptical use of Lat. incertum, e.g. in Livy xxxi. 41. 2, 
clauserunt portas incertum vi an voluntate. Cf. iv. 593. 

in ocean. So in II. 410 Satan speaks of the World as "the happy 
isle.'" Chaos, in which it hung, was a mixture of land and sea (n. 939, 
940). 

80343. This Council in Heaven has been called a less dramatic 
counterpart to the Council in Hell in book n. It is perhaps to some of 
these speeches that Pope would have pointed for the justification of his 
famous sneer ("To Augustus," 99 102, Imitations of Horace): 
" Milton's strong pinion now not Heaven can bound, 
Now serpent-like in prose he sweeps the ground ; 
In quibbles angel and archangel join, 
And God the Father turns a School-divine." 

Addison showed, with more sympathy, the difficulty inherent in the 
subject: the poet here "dares not give his imagination full play." 
82, 83. the chains. Cf. I. 48. 

84. -wide interrupt, with its wide division, i.e. between Hell and 
Heaven, interrupt', a past participle = Lat. interrupttts. 
90. assay, attempt. 

93. glozing, flattering ; with the idea of falsehood. 

94. the sole command, i.e. to abstain from the forbidden tree. 

100. Cf. Satan's own words, iv. 6368. That the rebellious 
angels, like Adam and Eve, had free will, to obey or disobey, is 
emphasised in V. 525 43 and elsewhere. Cf. 7^he Christian Doctrine, I. 
3, "in assigning the gift of free will, God suffered both men and 
angels to stand or fall at their own uncontrolled choice" (P. W. iv. 38). 

101. failed. Bentley thought that M. dictated *; cf. 102. 

106, 107. Cf. The Christian Doctrine, I. 4, "the acceptableness 
of duties done under a law of necessity is... annihilated altogether" 
(P. W. iv. 63). 

108. "When God gave him [Adam] reason, he gave him freedom 
to choose, for reason is but choosing," Areopagitica (P. W. n. 74). 
Reason is speculative: will, practical in fact, the power of putting 
reason into action. It is by reason that we choose the right course, 
by will that we take it. Such seems Milton's meaning. 

129. the first sort, the fallen angels, suggestion, temptation; a 
common Elizabethan sense ; cf. IX. 90. 

135. ambrosial, delicious. 

136. Cf. i Timothy v. 21, "the elect angels," which M. explains in 
The Chnstian Doctrine, I. 9, to mean "beloved, or excellent." 
See 360, vi. 374, 375. In P. L. this Scriptural word marks off the 
good angels from the revolted. 



NOTES. 435 

13842. Cf. vi. 68r, 682, note. 

143. -which, viz. his compassion, love and grace ( = graciousness). 

147. The hymns and songs are "innumerable," not their "sound." 

150. should Man... be lost? * would it be right that Man should be 
lost?' The original editions mark that it is a question. 

J 53 1 54- "That be far from thee to do after this manner, to slay 
the righteous with the wicked," Gen. xviii. 25. 

156. The name Satan means 'adversary'; cf. Dante's ' antico 
avversaro {Purgatorio, XI. 20) ; and "foe" in 179. 

159. return, i.e. to Hell. 

163. abolish thy creation', as Beelzebub hoped (i I. 368 70). 

1 66. blasphemed, impiously spoken ill of. 

1 68. "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased," 
Mat. iii. 17. 

169. "The only-begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the 
Father," John i. 18. Cf. 239, 279. 

170. my word', referring to the use in the New Testament of 
'Word,' Gk. X6yos (Vulgate verbum), as a title of the Son; see 383, 
note, effectual might, i.e. power by whom the will of the Father was 
effected, e.g. in the creation of the World ( John i. i 3 ; cf. 
P. L. vii.). 

176. lapsed, lost through man's offence, forfeit, forfeited. The 
tone and wording of the line are legal; cf. 219. 

177. exorbitant, excessive. 
179. mortal, deadly; cf. I. 2. 

183, 1 84. The doctrine of predestination here alluded to is discussed 
by M. at some length in The Christian Doctrine, I. 4. 

185, 186. i.e. be warned of their state and advised to appease. 

189. Perhaps M. refers to Ezekiel xxxvi. 26. 

197. persisting', in a good sense = ' continuing steadfast.' 

safe arrive, i.e. attain salvation ultimately. Cf. Matthew x. 22. 

206. The Serpent tempts Eve with the promise of godhead, IX. 
708. Cf. Gen. iii. 5, "in the day ye eat thereof.. .ye shall be as gods." 

affecting, seeking to win; Lat. affectare, 'to aim at.' 

208. sacred and devote, utterly doomed. The words have practi- 
cally the same meaning: sacred='LaA.. sacer, 'dedicated to a deity for 
destruction'; devote Lat. devotus, 'set apart as by a vow (votum) ' with 
the same object. 

2ii. as willing) i.e. not less willing than able. 

215. mortal crime, i.e. deadly; the use of mortal in its two senses 
(cf. 214) is an intentional quibble. Cf. I. 642, note, IV. 181. 

to save, i.e. which of ye will be so just as to save the unjust? 

282 



436 PARADISE LOST. BOOK III. 

(Newton). Cf. i Pet. iii. 18, "For Christ also hath once suffered for 
sins, the just for the unjust." 

216. charity ', love. 

217. All the angels of Heaven shrink from the task of saving man, 
just as all the fallen angels their leader excepted shrank from under- 
taking the expedition to ruin man (n. 417 26). The Saviour himself 
must achieve the one work, as the Tempter himself the other (Newton). 
Dryden challenged comparison when he wrote The Hind and the 
Panther, u. 499514. 

218. "There was silence in heaven," Rev. viii. i. 

219. The metaphor of the passage being legal, probably patron 
Lat. patronus in its legal sense, 'defender,' "advocate" (i John ii. i). 
Cf. Minsheu's old Dictionary (1625): "A Patrone, or defender... L. 
advocatus qui alterum defendit." 

intercessor. "And he saw that there was no man, and wondered 
that there was no intercessor," Isaiah lix. 16. 

225. "For in him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily," 
Colossians ii. 9. 

226. dearest, most heartfelt, earnest. 

227. passed, pledged. 

231. For this favourite form of verse see II. 185, note, and cf. 
Hamlet, I. 5. 77, "Unhousel'd, disappointed, unaneled." 

tmprevented, unanticipated (i.e. by prayer); grace comes before man 
has prayed for her. prevent ;Lat. pncvenire, ' to come before.' 

233. dead in sins; from Colossians ii. 13. 

2 3^> 237. me. ..me. For this emphatic repetition see vi. 812 19. 

243. given me to possess. A Latinism; cf. I. 736, xi. 339. 

244 65. Texts of Scripture referred to ar 'C: John v. 26; Psalms 
xvi. 10, u, Ixviii. 18; Acts ii. 27; i Cor. xv. 26, 55; Col. ii. 15; 
Rev. xx. 14. In the speeches which he assigns to the Almighty 
or the Son M. employs largely the words of Scripture. 

246. all; qualifying in the previous sentence: ' I am his due at 
least, all of me that can die.' 

255. maugre, in spite of; O. Fr. maugre modern Fr. malgre. 

show, i.e. to the Almighty. 

258. ruin, hurl down. M. uses ruin = L,at. ruina in its literal 
sense ' fall.' Thus in I. 46 he speaks of the "ruin " of the angels from 
heaven, and in S. A. 1514, 1515 of the " ruin " of Dagon's temple, i.e. 
'fall.' 

266. Scan aspect, as usually in M. and Shakespeare ; cf. IV. 

54i- 

270. attends, awaits ; cf. Fr. attendre. 






NOTES. 437 

271. admiration, wonder; cf. the verb in II. 677, 678. 

275. Tinder wrath; referring to the future, when man shall have 
incurred the Almighty's wrath by the disobedience of Adam and 
Eve. 

276. complacence, pleasure, i.e. in whom pleasure is taken. 

277. 278. An allusion to the proverbial phrase ; cf. Julius Casar, 
ill. i. 189, "Though last, not least, in love"; and King Lear, I. i. 
85, 86, " our joy, Although the last, not least" 

285. room, place, stead. 

285 89. See i Cor. xi. 3, xv. 22 (" as in Adam all die "). 

290 94. Referring to the doctrine of imputed righteousness which 
M. deals with in the chapter " Of Justification," The Christian Doctrine, 
I. 22. He writes, " As therefore our sins are imputed to Christ, so 
the merits or righteousness of Christ are imputed to us through faith"; 
then he illustrates the doctrine from Scripture. Cf. P. L. xii. 407 10. 

299, 300. giving to, yielding, submitting, to ; somewhat similar is 
2 Henry IV. I. i. 164, 165, "if you give o'er to stormy passion," i.e. 
yield to. Some interpret, ' giving himself* so dearly, at such a cost. 

306. equal to God. Philippians ii. 6. 

312 41. Among the texts embodied in these lines are: Phil. i. 
9, ii. 10 ; Mat. xxiv. 30, 31, xxviii. 18 ; i Cor. xv. 51,52; i Thess. iv. 16. 

317. anointed; alluding to the meaning of Messiah ' anointed.' 

318. 319. Cf. Horace's sume siiperbiam  quasitam meritis(0d.l. 
30. 14, 15). merits, deserts. 

319. Cf. Ephes. iv. 15, " the head, even Christ." So in V. 606. 

320. All titles of the three Hierarchies of Heavenly beings. Prince- 
doms = ' Principalities ' (vi. 447), Gk. d>xcu'. See Appendix, pp. 680 82 . 

326. i.e. from the four quarters of the compass. Cf. II. 516, note. 
See The Merchant of Venice, I. i. 168, and cf. Tennyson, Pelleas and 
Ettarre : 

"Then Arthur made vast banquets, and strange knights 
From the four winds came in." 

327. cited, summoned. 

328. doom, judgment. Cf. Romeo and Juliet, III. 2. 67, "Then, 
dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom ! " ; and Lucrece, 924, " From 
the creation to the general doom." 

329. a peal, i.e. of the last trumpet (i Cor. xv. 52). Cf. Nat. Ode, 
155, 156. 

330. Saints, righteous men ; a favourite word in this sense with M. 
and with the Puritans; cf. 461, and XII. 200, note. 

333 35- Based on 2 Peter iii. 12, 13, as to which Dr Salmon 



438 PARADISE LOST. BOOK III. 

wrote " Many parts of the Canonical Scriptures speak of fire as the 
future punishment of the wicked ; but I do not remember any other 
place where it is said that the whole world itself shall be burned " 
(Introduction to New Test.). The doctrine is conspicuous in works 
like the Revelation of Peter which reveal the influence of the Second 
Epistle. M. recurs to it xi. 900, 901, xn. 546 51. 

335. " And I saw a new heaven and a new earth, " Rev. xxi. i. 

338. For the apparent accentuation (triumphing], see I. 123, note. 

340. need, be necessary ; cf. IV. 235. 

341. " That God may be all in all," i Cor. xv. 28. 

gods ; M. applies this title ( = ' angelic or divine being ') alike to the 
" elect " and to the fallen angels (i. 116). 

344 415. A parallel to the account in II. 521 628 how the fallen 
angels " spent their hours" (417) in Hell. 

344 47. all the multitude .. .uttering ', an absolute construction. 
The Angels are a " Chorus" such as M. contemplated for his drama 
on the subject of Paradise Lost (Dunster). 

350. towards either throne  i.e. towards the Father and the Son. 
See the vision of " the four and twenty elders," Revelation iv. 

353. amarant, the unfading flower; "immortal"; see XI. 78, 
note. 

356. Perhaps the idea of the flower being transferred was suggested 
by the Rabbinical doctrine that after the Fall of Man "the Garden [of 
Eden], with its contents, was removed to Heaven " (Keightley). 

357 358' Alluding to the " pure river of water of life, clear as 
crystal" (xxii. i), the "living fountains of waters" (vii. 17), mentioned 
in Revelation ; "on either side of the river was there the tree of life" 
(xxii. 2). 

359. Elysian, such as might grow in Elysium = n Vergil and other 
classical writers the region in which dwelt the souls of the good. Cf. 
Shelley, Prometheus, II. 2, " Elysian flowers, Nepenthe, Moly, Ama- 
ranth." Milton's ' Heaven ' is, in the main, the ' Paradise ' described 
by the early apocalyptic writings of Christianity ; and in this ' Paradise' 
flowers are a conspicuous feature. 

amber, clear, transparent as amber ; one of those literary epithets 
(cf. P. R. III. 288, Gray, Progress of Poesy, 69) due to the classics ; 
cf. Vergil's purior electro... amnis Georg. in. 522. 

362 64. ' Now the pavement was bright (" smiled ") with roses 
in garlands which the angels threw down thick.' 

363. "And before the throne there was a sea of glass, like unto 
crystal," Rev. iv. 6. 



NOTES. 439 

364. impurpled, made brilliant. Cf. Lycidas, 141, "And purple 
all the ground with vernal flowers. " 

smiled ; cf. the use of Lat. ridere * to be bright, gay with,' e.g. as 
a field with flowers. 

368. symphony, harmonious strains; cf. I. 712. 

371. part', used in its musical sense, as in ' part-song.' 

375 77* Cf. 3 8. The construction is ' Invisible, except when 
thou shadest...and thy skirts appear.' 

380. dark with excessive bright. Scientifically a fact ; as a figure 
of speech, an oxymoron (see IV. 314, note). Similar is V. 598, 599. 
Cf. Drummond's Hymn of the Fairest Fair (apostrophising the 
Trinity) : 

"Incomprehensible by reachless height, 
And unperceived by excessive light." 

Spenser had had the same idea ; cf. An Hymne of Heavenly Beautie, 
iiS, 119, 17679. 

381, 382. Cf. Isaiah vi. 2, "Above it stood the seraphims : each 
one had six wings ; with twain he covered his face" M. chooses the 
Seraphim as being the most lustrous, the "brightest" (667), of 
the Heavenly Orders ; yet even they cannot bear the extreme radiance. 
See Gray's lines on Milton, Appendix, p. 683. 

383. Cf. The Christian Doctrine, I. 5, "certain it is... that the 
Son existed in the beginning, under the name of the logos or Word [see 
170, note], and was the first of the whole creation" (P. W. IV. 80). 
That chapter (" Of the Son of God ") reveals Milton's Arianism very 
clearly. 

389. Cf. vi. 704. 

391 99. Closely similar to the account of the battle in Heaven in 
which Satan and his host are overthrown by Messiah (vi. 831 92). 

392. Dominations ; the title (Gk. Kvpi6TijTes) of one of the Orders 
of Heavenly beings. 

395. frame, fabric ; a favourite word with M. ; cf. n. 924, v. 

154. 

398. thee only, since Messiah drove out the foe unaided (vi. 880). 

406. Supply than or but ; the main verb is offered (409). 

413, 414. my song... my harp. Probably the speaker is intended 
to be the chorus of angels, regarded as one individual (in accordance 
with the constant practice of the Greek dramatists cf. the choruses of 
S. A.) the reference to harp (cf. 365) makes this probable. But it 
is possible that M. himself is speaking. 

416. starry sphere, the starlit sky of this World ; so in V. 620. 



440 PARADISE LOST. BOOK III. 

418. opacous, gloomy, because hung in Chaos. 

419, 420. first convex, the Primum Mobile or tenth sphere, formed 
of solid matter (cf. " firm," 418), and serving as the outer shell of the 
World, and so dividing from Chaos the nine other spheres ( = "luminous 
inferior orbs ") which are inside. See Appendix, p. 666. 

422, 423. The Universe was so vast that its spherical shape was 
only perceptible from a distance ; standing on its surface, Satan might 
have supposed it to be a plain. Cf. II. 1047, 1048. 

429. glimmering; a favourite epithet of Tennyson; it suggests 
the faint light of early morning (n. 1037, Nat. Ode, 75) and twilight 
(i. 182, II Penseroso, 27). The latter use is Gray's (Elegy, 5, "the 
glimmering landscape" recalling Macbeth, in. 3. 5). 

430. at large, freely, without restraint ; cf. I. 790. 

431 39. Upon the geography see Appendix, pp. 683, 684. The 
elaborate form of the simile is very characteristic. Like Vergil, M. often 
works a simile out in all its bearings. Here the comparison is very 
apposite ; the vulture = Satan ; the flocks = mankind, Satan's prey; the 
barren plains = the "continent" where he alighted. Addison dwells 
on the peculiar grandeur of Milton's similes, which almost always 
convey " some very great idea" "some glorious image or sentiment." 
Dante's similes, much more numerous than Milton's, are less classical 
in form, and often drawn from homely subjects ; sometimes he is very 
minute in the details. 

432. snowy. The name Imaus is cognate with the Sanskrit 
himavat, ' snowy,' and survives in Himalaya, ' the region of cold.' 

434. yeanling, newly born. 

435 436- Ganges or Hydaspes both have their "springs" (i.e. 
sources) in the Himalayas. Drummond mentions the two rivers, as 
typifying India or the East, in the same couplet of Forth Feasting. 
Hydaspes was the classical name for the modern Jhelum. The form 
of the line is a favourite with M. ; cf. 36, and I. 469, " Of Abbana 
and Pharphar, lucid streams." 

438, 439- Newton quotes from Heylyn's Cosmography (the best 
known English geographical work of the I7th century), "the country 
[China] is so plain [flat] and level, that they have carts and coaches driven 
with sails" ; and I find in Jonson's News from the New World'. " Herald. 
Yes, but the coaches... go only with wind. Chronicler. Pretty! like 
China waggons." The following is from Staunton's Embassy to China 
(1797), cited by Todd : " The custom mentioned by some old travellers, 
of the Chinese applying sails to carriages by land is still, in some 
degree, retained. [He then quotes Milton's lines and continues :] 



NOTES. 441 

Those cany waggons are small carts, or double barrows, of bamboo, 
with one large wheel between them. When there is no wind to favour 
the progress of such a cart, it is drawn by a man, who is regularly 
harnessed to it, while another keeps it steady from behind, besides 
assisting in pushing it forward. The sail, when the wind is favourable, 
saves the labour of the former of these two men. It consists only of a 
mat fixed between two poles rising from the opposite sides of the cart. 
This simple contrivance can only be of use when the cart is intended to 
run before the wind " (u. p. 76). 

The plural Chineses was in regular use during the iyth cent. ; 
cf. the title of a work published in 1606, "An exact Discourse of the 
East Indians as well as Chyneses and Jauans " (see New English Diet.). 

440. so ; Milton's constant manner of completing a simile. Cf. 
IV. 166, 192, 819. sea ; perhaps suggested by "sails" (439). 

444 97. The germ of the whole idea lies in Ariosto's Orlando 
Ftirioso, canto 34, of which M. himself translates several lines in Of 
Reformation (P. W. II. 383). The passage represents Astolfo, the 
English knight, as being taken up in Elijah's chariot into the moon and 
led by St John 

" Into a goodly valley, where he sees 
A mighty mass of things strangely confus'd, 
Things that on earth were lost, or were abus'd." 
M. says that there is (as people thought) a Paradise of Fools (496), the 
rubbish-heap of the Universe : only it is situated, not in the moon 
(459), but on this outside of the globe where Satan is walking. And 
from the interior of the World it is approached thus (481 86) : vain 
things and souls (448) mount upward from Earth past the ten spheres, 
reach the opening in the globe's surface, where the ladder leads up to 
Heaven (cf. 503 et seg.), and emerge on to the outside when, lo ! 
(486 89) cross-winds suddenly sweep them clean away from the ladder, 
and, whirled into space, they descend into their appointed Paradise, on 
the backside (494) of the globe. 

The almost burlesque satire of the passage seems scarce in keeping 
with the dignity of an epic; it has too the demerit of improbability. 
Probably Milton's main purpose was to introduce the attack on the 
Church of Rome, carefully placed at the end as a climax. Hardly less 
bitter, though less direct, are his assaults on the Church of England ; 
see IV. 193, note. He could have pointed to the precedent of Dante's 
invective against the Papacy, e.g. in the Purgalorio, xvi., and Paradise, 

XXVII. 

Milton's brother Christopher became a Roman Catholic; see 
Hearne's Collections, Doble's ed., I. 288, 289, II. 63. 



442 PARADISE LOST. BOOK III. 

For the Ariosto allusion see also Dryden's 2nd Prologue (1681) to 
the University of Oxford, lines i 6. 

444. store, plenty. " Store is no sore " (an old proverb). 

449. fond, foolish ; so fondly ' foolishly ' in 470. 

451 54. Mainly a sarcasm against priestcraft. M., like Lucretius, 
detested "superstition," classing it with "tyranny"; see n. 59, 
note. 

456. abortive, born before their time, unkindly, unnaturally. 

457. in vain, at random, without purpose (Richardson). 

459. some, viz. Ariosto. Cf. Pope, The Rape of the Lock y v. 113, 
114, referring to Belinda's tress : 

" Some thought it mounted to the Lunar sphere, 
Since all things lost on Earth are treasur'd there." 

460, 461. Apparently M. thought that the moon is inhabited ; 
cf. viii. 140 58. translated saints, e.g. Enoch (Gen. v. 24), Elijah 
(2 Kings ii.). middle ; explained in the next line. 

463 65. He means the "mighty men. ..men of renown," who 
were born of the "sons of God " and " the daughters of men " (Gen. vi. 
4). In XI. 621 25 M. identifies the "sons of God" with the pious 
descendants of Seth ; in v. 447 and P. ?. u. 178, 179 he regards them 
as angels. Gen. vi. 4 has been interpreted in both ways, Dryden may 
have recollected these lines; cf. The Hind and the Panther, I. 
34144. 

466, 467. See the fuller reference to the building of Babel, XH. 
38 62. Sennaar=Shina.r (Gen. xi. 2). M. uses the Vulgate form of 
the name ; the Septuagint has Sevadp. -^ 

469 71. Empedocles, a Greek philosopher of Agrigentum in 
Sicily ; * flourished ' about B.C. 444. " He threw himself into the flames 
of Mount ^Etna, that by his sudden disappearance he might be believed 
to be a god; but. ..the volcano threw up one of his sandals and thus 
revealed the manner of his death " (Classical Dictionary). 

sEtna ; this adjectival use of names (to avoid *s followed by s) is 
common in Shakespeare; cf. "Philippi fields," Julius Casar, v. 5. 19. 

471 73. Cleombrotus, a philosopher of Ambracia in Epirus ; 
according to the legend, he drowned himself after reading Plato's 
description of Elysium in the Phado, in order that he might exchange 
this life for a better, too long, i.e. to tell. 

474. embryos, beings in an immature, undeveloped state. He 
uses embryon for the adjective ; cf. n. 900, vii. 277. eremites = 
hermits ; from Gk. ^17^7175, ' a dweller in a desert ' (Gk. tp-qfJLla}. 

friar=*Fr. frere (d.frere in Chaucer), the distinguishing title of the 
mendicant orders, of which, till the I5th century, there were four; cf. 



NOTES. 443 

Chaucer, Prologue, 210, " alle the ordres foure." M. mentions three, the 
fourth being the Augustinian hermits or Austin Friars. 

475. white, the Carmelites, so called after Mt Carmel, where the 
crusader Berthold established the order, about 1156. They wear a 
white cloak. 

black, the Dominicans, an order of preaching friars (Fratres Preedi- 
cantes) founded in 1215 by St Dominic, a Spaniard; cf. 479. A long 
black mantle or cappa forms part of their dress. 

grey, the Franciscans, founded in 1209 by St Francis of Assisi ; cf. 
480. They wear a grey gown of coarse cloth what M. in his In 
Quintum Novembris, 8r, 82, calls cineracea vestis, i.e. ash-coloured. 

From their respective garbs the three orders were known in England 
as the White Friars, the Black Friars, and the Grey Friars. 

476, 477. An allusion to the pilgrimages in the Middle Ages, 
to the tomb of Christ in the garden (John xix. 41) of the place 
Golgotha, where Christ was crucified. 

478 80. Alluding to the belief that even laymen, if they died in 
friars' robes ("weeds") would pass into Heaven (Masson). 

481 83. To understand these lines one must know something about 
the Ptolemaic cosmology ; see Appendix, pp. 664 66. 

A close parallel is Donne's Progress of the Soul, in which he describes 
how the soul ascends through the air, passes the planets (he names 
them) one after another, and so reaches Heaven. 

481. the fixed, i.e. stars, set in the eighth sphere = Ccelum Stellatum. 
Note that ' stars,' not ' sphere,' is the word understood : the stars in this 
sphere are fixed, but the sphere itself revolves nay, is marked by the 
rapidity of its revolution (cf. V. 176, " orb that flies "). 

482, 483. i.e. that sphere which with its balance determines the 
amount of the swaying motion (" trepidation ") so much talked about. 
See the notes on vin. 130 40. 

that, the well-known, Lat. ille. Scan crystalline. 

talked, talked of; this contemptuous word rather implies that M. 
did not believe in the theory of the " trepidation." 

that first moved, the Primum Mobile, or tenth sphere ; cf. The 
Death of a Fair Infant, 39, "that high first-moving sphere." 

484, 485. Intended as a sneer (cf. the depreciatory word "wicket ") 
at the Roman Catholic doctrine of ' the power of the keys ' ; cf. Mat. 
xvi. 19, " And I will give unto thee [Peter] the keys of the kingdom 
of heaven." M. discusses the subject in The Christian Doctrine, I. 29. 
Other references to it in his works are Lycidas, 108 n ; In Quintum 
Novembris, 101 ; and Areopagitica,vfhere, ridiculing the Roman Catholic 
censorship of publications and the Papal imprimatur ', he says: "as if 



444 PARADISE LOST. BOOK III. 

St Peter had bequeathed them the keys of the press also as well as of 
Paradise!" (P. W. II. 60). 

485 89. For a parallel to this idea see the extract from the English 
Faust-book (1592) in the Appendix, p. 663. 

488. transverse, in a cross-direction, aside. 

489. devious, out of their course; the epithet is transferred (by 
hypallage} from them to air (cf. 147). 

49 93' Al1 terms specially associated with the Roman Catholic 
Church, reliques, relics, like the remains of the bodies or clothes of 
Saints and Martyrs ; Lat. reliquia. See the Prayer- Book, " Articles 
of Religion," xxn. beads, of the rosary, indulgences, such as the 
Roman Church grants, dispenses, dispensations, pardons, absolutions. 
bulls, papal edicts ; so called from the round leaden seal, bulla. 

493. the sport ; alluding to sEneid VI. 74, 75, where tineas begs 
of the Sibyl : 

" But oh ! commit not thy prophetic mind 

To flitting leaves, the sport of every wind" 
(ludibria ventis) Dryden. 

495. limbo, region. 

496. Paradise of Fools ; a proverbial phrase ; cf. Romeo and Juliet, 
II. 4. 176- 

501. travelled', some interpret ' tired. ' 

502. degrees, steps ; cf. Julius C<zsar, II. i. 25, 26. 

510. Gen. xxviii. n 17. Probably Milton's notion of a stair 
connecting the Universe with Heaven was suggested by Jacob's dream ; 
cf. the Paradiso, XX I. There is some verbal likeness (and possibly the 
same Scriptural allusion) in a cancelled passage of Comus, after line 

215: 

"I see yee visibly & while I see yee 
this dusky hollow is a paradise 
& heaven gates ore my head." 

516. mysteriously, i.e. had a mystic, allegorical meaning. 

517, 518. i.e. was drawn up and became "viewless" ( = unseen). 
518 22. He means the Crystalline sphere = the "wide Crystalline 

ocean" (vn. 271), "the glassy sea" (vn. 619), which the angels 
behold through the opening (cf. 526 28) in the surface of the Uni- 
verse as they stand at Heaven's gate and look down the stairs (vu. 
6!y j^). M. has already said that souls ascending Heavenward 
from Earth must pass this sphere (482). 

521. wafted, carried : like Lazarus (Luke xvi. 22). 

522. rapt, caught up: like Elijah (2 Kings ii. 11). Cf. P. R. II. 
16, 17. 






NOTES. 



445 



326 30,. This is the only opening in the surface of the outer 
shell (Primum Mobile) of the Universe. 

527. i.e. immediately above the site of the Garden of Eden. 

530. though that, i.e. the second passage mentioned in 531. The 
Old Testament often speaks of angels visiting the Earth, and here we are 
told that there were two aerial paths for their descent, one leading 
straight down from Heaven on to Mount Sion, the other extending over 
the whole Promised Land. 

534. his eye, viz. passed, choice regard, careful watch, look. 

535, 536. i.e. "from Dan even to Beer-sheba " = from N. to S. of 
Canaan. Paneas, the later Greek name of Dan, a little S. of Mount 
Hermon, at the foot of which the Jordan has its chief source. 

The form Beersaba, instead of ' Beer^eba,' illustrates M.'s avoidance 
of the sound sh in proper names; cf. I. 398, note. He often uses the 
Septuagint or Vulgate form. The Septuagint has l$ijp<rap&, the Vulgate 
Bersabee. 

540. on the lower stair, at the bottom of the stairs. 

541. scaled, ascended like a ladder (Lat. scala). 

546. obtains, attains to, reaches (obtinet). 

547. discovers, unfolds; Fr. decouvrir. 

549. Was M. recalling to memory one of the Italian cities visited 
on that tour in 1638 39 to which his thoughts reverted so gladly? 
Perhaps Florence on which he had looked down from Fiesole (see I. 
289, 290, notes); or, yet more likely, Rome. The epithet "glistering" 
suggests an Italian scene. Cf. the famous description in P. R. of im- 
perial Rome and the "glittering spires" of the Palatine (iv. 54). 

551. To complete the sense, understand some words like "he (the 
scout) is seized with wonder " (Keightley). 

552. though after, i.e. although he was familiar with the splendours 
of Heaven. For the Latinism (post ccelwn visum) cf. I. 573. 

555 57- Standing at the topmost point of the globe, just at the 
opening, Satan can survey the whole interior of the Universe from E. 
to W. (55760), and from N. to S. (560, 561). 

He is far above the night that we know on Earth simply because he 
is far above the sun. circling, surrounding, canopy ; used somewhat 
similarly, of the sky in general, in Hamlet, II. 2. 311, and Coriolanus, 
iv. 5. 41. Cf. "cope" in iv. 992. 

558 60. the fleecy star, Aries, the Ram exactly opposite in the 
Zodiac (in the west) to Libra, the Balance (in the east). M. says that 
the constellation Andromeda is borne by Aries because it lies above 
Aries in the sky, though rather to the west, the horizon, i.e. of this 
Earth. 



446 PARADISE LOST. BOOK III. 

No poet, I think, conveys a sense of vast distance so acutely as does 
Milton, perhaps from his blindness, and these lines are a signal example 
of his gift ; excelling perhaps in the suggestion of sheer remoteness and 
space even the simile of the ships (n. 636 43). 

562. first region, i.e. the uppermost of the three "regions" (a 
technical term) into which medkeval physicists supposed the air to be 
divided; it was distinguished by the pure dry heat of its atmo- 
sphere. 

563. and winds. In his downward flight Satan has passed through 
two spheres, the Primum Mobile and Crystalline. Now he is in the 
Calum Stellatum, moving up and down (cf. "oblique way") among the 
host of fixed stars (cf. 481). Till 573 we must picture him in this 
sphere. 

564. marble, lucid, bright as marble = marmoreus ; cf. Cymbeline, 
v. 4. 120, "the marble pavement," i.e. the sky, heavens. 

565. 566. i.e. that at a distance seemed to be stars. A Greek idiom. 

567. happy isles= those Islands of the Blessed, to which, according 
to an early Greek belief, favoured mortals passed without dying. Later 
these Fortunate? Insulce came to be identified with islands off the west 
coast of Africa (probably the Canaries). One of Ben Jonson's Masques 
is called "The Fortunate Isles." 

568. i.e. the gardens (cf. Comus, 981 83, P. X. II. 357) in which 
grew the golden apples (iv. 250, Comus, 393 97) guarded by the 
daughters of Hesperus and the dragon Ladon. The Hesperidum Insiila 
in which the gardens were commonly placed by writers have been 
identified with the Cape de Verde islands (so perhaps by M. himself in 
vin. 631, 632). There is a hitherto unpublished poem, of some length, 
on The Hesperides by Tennyson, in his Life, and lines 981 83 of 
Comus are prefixed to it as motto. 

571. above, more than not 'over,' connoting place, since the 
sphere of the sun is below the sphere of the fixed stars ; in fact, being 
the middle one of the spheres of the seven planets (cf. Troilus and 
Cressida, i. 3. 89 91), it is separated from the Calum Slellatum by 
three spheres, viz. those of Saturn, Jupiter and Mars (in that order). 

574 76. Newton explains: up or down, north or south; by 
centre or eccentric^ towards the centre, or from the centre...^ longitude, 
east or west (cf. IV. 539). Other editors note (i) that M. leaves it 
undetermined whether the sun (cf. vin. 122, 123) or the Earth is the 
centre of the Universe, i.e. whether the Copernican or Ptolemaic 
astronomy is right: (2) that he makes longitude ts&. to west, and 
breadth (561), i.e. latitude = norh to south : a use which we just reverse. 

577. aloof, apart from; rare as preposition. 






NOTES. 447 

580, 581. numbers, measures = Lat. numeri used of the measures 
of a dance. See vm. 123 25. 

compile days etc. ; cf. Genesis i. 14. Plato speaks of the planets 
as created by the Deity ets 5iopi<rj,6v KO.L <f>vaK7]v api.dnuv -^povov, "f r 
defining and preserving the numbers of time," Timaus 38 c. 

586. virttie, efficacy; cf. 608. A favourite word with Dante ; cf. the 
Paradiso, II. 68, 70, 113, 139. the deep, the lowest part of the Universe. 

58890. Probably he is thinking of Galileo, who in 1609 con- 
structed a telescope ("optic tube") by which the spots on the solar disc 
were perceptible. See I. 288, note. 

tube ; the common i yth century word for the telescope ; cf. Marvell's 
Satires (" To the King ") : 

"So his bold tube man to the sun applied, 

And spots unknown in the bright star descried." 
Sir Thomas Browne says : " Let intellectual tubes give thee a glance of 
things which visive organs reach not" (Christian Morals, in. xiv.). 

592. The First and Second Eds. have medal here, but metal 

in 595- 

593. informed^ pervaded by, filled, inspired with. In this sense, 
which does not occur elsewhere in M., inform became one of the 
stereotyped, poetic words of the i8th century. 

594. glowing iron, i.e. ' like iron glowing with fire.' 

596 98. chrysolite... ruby. Exodus xxviii. 1720. In verse 20 the 
Heb. tarshish, rendered "beryl " in the A.V., is a chrysolite according 
to the Septuagint and Vulgate ; and in verse 17 the margin of the A.V. 
has "ruby" instead of "sardius." 

to, to the full number of the twelve. 

600. that stone " the philosopher's stone " ; cf. The Hind and the 
Panther, u. 112, 113. 

601. philosophers, alchemists, who tried to compose a stone which 
would transmute other metals into gold. Cf. Reginald Scot, Discoverie 
of Witchcraft, 1584, xiv. u, speaking of alchemists, "Now you must 
understand that the end and drift of all their worke is, to atteine unto 
the composition of the philosopher's stone, called Alixer" : i.e. 
elixir. 

602. 603. bind... Hermes, solidify and fix mercury or quicksilver. 
Cf. Ben Jonson's Mercury Vindicated from the Alchemists ; the scene is 
"a Laboratory or Alchemist's- workhouse," Mercury appears, and 
Vulcan as the chief alchemist cries out "Stay, see! our Mercury 
is coming forth... call forth our philosophers [cf. 601]. He will be 
gone, he will evaporate... Precious golden Mercury, be fixt : be not so 
volatile " And later (speaking to his assistants) : "Begin your charm, 



448 PARADISE LOST. BOOK III. 

sound music, circle him in, and take him: if he will not obey, bind 
him." 

Hermes ; the Greek name of Mercury (Lat. Mercurius}. 

603605. old Proteus', the prophetic old man of the sea (d'Xtos 
ytpwv). To escape prophesying, he would transform himself into 
"various shapes" (cf. Protean = ' shifting, changeable'); but when he 
was firmly seized, as by Menelaus (Odyssey IV. 454, 455) and Aristaeus 
(Georgic iv. 437 40), he would return to "his native form" and 
foretell the future. Milton uses this legend to illustrate the processes 
of alchemists : the matter on which they experiment is, like Proteus, 
transformed by being drained through alembics ( = ' limbecs') or stills, 
till at last they restore it to its original ("native ") form. 

call up. According to legend, no one had this power over 
Proteus : he only issued from the sea of his own accord, at midday, 
to sleep on the shore. But, to emphasise the "powerful art" of the 
alchemists, M. suggests that they might even summon up Proteus at 
their will. 

606. here, in the sun : if the sun's heat can produce such marvellous 
effects on the far-off Earth (61 1), how much more on its own orb ! The 
sun is compared with an alchemist in King John, in. i. 77 80 (Newton). 

607, 608. breathe,.. elixir , i.e. exhale a force similar to that life- 
prolonging force or principle called elixir vita, which the alchemists 
believed to be contained in a tincture of gold called auntni potabile 
= the "potable gold" of 608. 

610. i.e. though mixed with moisture which weakens his power. 

611. here, on Earth, in the dark, underground, precious things, 
precious stones, metals. "It was the belief of those times that these 
were produced by the influence of the sun" (Keightley). Cf. Dryden's 
Annus Mirabilis, st. 3, with his footnote: "Precious stones at first 
are dew condensed, and hardened by the warmth of the sun or sub- 
terranean fires." Dryden's editor in the Clarendon Press Series gives 
other references (p. 244). The idea seems to be present in Pope's Moral 
Essays, I. 141 48, II. 785 92, and Collins's Ode to Liberty (end). 

613. gaze; often transitive; cf. V. 272, vm. 258. Similarly the 
noun is used in the sense of a thing gazed at; cf. Macbeth, v. 8. 23, 24 : 

"Then yield thee, coward, 

And live to be the show and gaze o' the time." 
616 19. "Where Satan was, i.e. on the Sun itself, all was 
sunshine without visible shadow, just as, on Earth, at the equator at 
noon, the Sun's beams striking vertically downwards, in the self-same 
manner that they were now shooting directly upwards, cause opaque 
objects to have no slanting shadow round them" (Masson). 



NOTES. 449 

617. This position of the sun is technically called his culmination. 

620. visual ray = ' power of seeing ' ; light which makes sight possible 
is put for sight itself. Cf. S. A. 163. 

623. "And I saw an angel standing in the sun," Rev. xix. 17. 
Young (Night Thoughts) says, "A Christian dwells, like Uriel, in the 
sun. " 

62528. Cf. The Passing of Arthur, 38486: 

"the light and lustrous curls 
That made his forehead like a rising sun 
High from the dais-throne"; 
and CEnone : 

"his sunny hair 

Cluster'd about his temples like a God's." 
Tennyson has it too in Tithonus. 

tiar, crown, illustrious, bright (Lat. illustris). fledge, feathered. 

628. charge, office, duty ; cf. 688. 

634. casts, plans; perhaps the metaphor of cast=* calculate.' 

637. i.e. not very young, yet youthful-looking (638) ; or 'not one 
of the great Cherubim' (prime 'chief'). 

643, 644. habit, dress, Lat. habitus ; probably in apposition to 
wings, as Milton's angels are always "feathered" (v. 284), not clothed 
(Newton), succinct, literally 'girt up'; hence 'ready, prepared,' taken 
with habit =" wings." decent, graceful, becoming. 

648, 649. In the chapter (l. 9) of The Christian Doctrine on angels, 
M. says, "Seven of these, in particular, are described [i.e. in Scripture] 
as traversing the earth in the execution of their ministry." They are 
"the seven angels which stood before God," Rev. viii. 2, "the seven 
Spirits which are before his throne," Rev. i. 4. Of these Uriel was 
one. He is mentioned four times in i Esdras, and in three places 
(iv. i, v. 20, x. 28) is called "Uriel the angel," but in the fourth (iv. 36) 
"Uriel the archangel." That he was "regent of the sun" (690) and 
dispenser of heat was a tradition, due probably to his name which 
signifies 'the fire of God.' Thus Heywood says that the four quarters 
of the world are assigned to the government of four angelic beings, and 
" The South, whence Auster comes, rules Uriel " (Hierarchic of the 
Blessed Angells, 1635 ed., p. 214). There is a passage to the same 
effect in Scot's Discotirse on Devils (1584), Nicholson's ed., p. 527. 
Cf. too Henry More (Song of the Soul, Cambridge ed., 1647, p. 53): 
" The fiery scorching shafts which Uriel 
From Southern quarter darted with strong hand." 

650 53. "Those seven: they are the eyes of the LORD, which 
run to and fro through the whole earth," Zechariah iv. 10. 

P. L. 29 



450 PARADISE LOST. BOOK III. 

654. The sentence introduces Satan's reason for asking information 
of Uriel: he does so because Uriel, as chief "interpreter" of God, is 
likely to know about the new Universe and its inhabitants. But strictly 
the sense is never completed; it takes a fresh turn in 662. 

655. Only these seven archangels may come so near to the 
Deity. 

656. authentic, authoritative, because received at first-hand, i.e. 
from God himself. Gk. ayfl^TTjs, 'one who does a thing himself.' 

65 7 658. Uriel brings the command of God to the inferior angels, 
vho await it at a distance, attend '; cf. 270. 

659. here, in the sun. 

667. Seraph; strictly not applicable to Uriel (an archangel). 

670. i.e. but hath his choice to dwell in all these orbs. 

674. graces, favours, marks of grace. 

681. unperceived, not discovered, undetected. 

686 89. A fine and just allegory that a wise man may be 
deceived through the very greatness of his nature : for he is filled with 
high thoughts, not mean suspicions: which makes him trust his fellow- 
men, and credit them with being as honest and true as himself. 

Had M. not dwelt on the power of hypocrisy it might have seemed 
strange to us that even Uriel should be deceived (Newton). 

699. M. always accents empyreal (but empyrean). 

704. had in remembrance', a Scriptural phrase; Acts x. 31. 

708.  saw. Uriel must have been among the angels who ac- 
companied Messiah when he went forth to create the World, VII. 
192 215. This rapid sketch (708 21) prepares us for the full 
narrative of the creation in book vn. ; such links betwean the different 
books are an important element in the construction of the whole. The 
lines reveal the influence of Plato's account of the creation (Ttmaus) 
and of Ovid's description of Chaos {Metamorphoses I. 5 et seq.}. For 
Milton's knowledge of the Tinuzus cf. v. 580 82, note. 

709. this World's material mould, i.e. the substance whereof the 
World was made, being matter in its primal state ; see V. 471, 
note. 

712. his,.. bidding, viz. "Let there be light," Gen. i. 3. 

713. order from disorder. Els rd^tv avrb -tjyayev K rijs dramas, 
Plato, Timaus 30 A; id ex inordinato in ordinem adduxit, Cicero, De 
Universo 3 (a translation of parts of the Timaus). Compare the discourse 
on order in canto I. of the Paradiso, e.g. 103105 : "All things what- 
soever observe a mutual order ; and this is the form that maketh the 
universe like unto God " ; also xxix. 2233. See also Bacon, The 
Advancement of Learning, n. 25. 20. 



NOTES. 451 

715. i.e. the four elements or constituent parts of which all things 
were thought to consist. See n. 274, 275, 898, notes. 

cumbrous  the epithet points the difference between them and the 
"ethereal" fifth element. Cf. Batman (1582), "Heaven is the fift 
Element, severed from the nether Elements, and distinguished by 
propertie of kinde: for it is not heavie, for then it might come 
downward" (p. 120). flood, water. 

716. M. refers to Aristotle's conception of a fifth element called 
"ether, "and he introduces the two main points of Aristotle's theory: 
(i) that "the ether fills the celestial spaces, and of it the spheres and 
stars are made" (cf. 718, 721); (2) that "the nature of the ether... 
adapts it especially for circular motion " (cf. " orbicular," 718), 
whereas the motion of the four elements is vertical, up and down. 
Ueberweg, from whose summary of Aristotle's views the foregoing 
quotations are made, says, "Ether is the first element in rank 
[i.e. according to Aristotle]; but if we enumerate, beginning with the 
elements directly known by the senses, it is the fifth, the subsequently 
so-called TT^TTTOV arQi-xeiov , quinta essential 

It is disputed whether this "fifth essence" ought to be called an 
element, since it lacks the principle of contraries that belongs to the 
four elements; and M. does not apply the title "element" to it. 
Practically he identifies the "fifth essence" or "ether" with Light 
(cf. VII. 243, 244), though "ether" (Gk. aid-fa, from aftteu', 'to glow') 
rather implies very bright atmosphere. 

Heaven, sky; cf. a definition of "ether" cited by G. H. Lewes 
from an Alexandrian treatise: "Ether is the substance of the heavens 
and the stars j so named because of its eternal circular motion " (an 
allusion to the false derivation of aid-rip from ad, * always ' + 6eiv, ' to run '). 

717. spirited, animated. 

718. orbicular ; with circular motion. 

721. i.e. what remained of the ether after the stars were made. 

730. See vn. 375 78, and cf. Hamlet, in. 2. 167, "moons with 
borrowed sheen"; and Drummond, Flowers of Sion : 

"The moon moves lowest, silver sun of night, 
Dispersing through the world her borrowed light." 

triform, referring to the three phases of the moon crescent, full and 
waning. But there is also an allusion to Lat. triformis as an epithet 
of the moon indicating her threefold capacity as Luna, Diana and 
Hecate; cf. Horace's diva triformis ; Od. in. 22. 4. So in Ben 
Jonson's Masque of Queens the moon is addressed as "thou three- 
formed star... to whose triple name... we incline"; cf. A Midsummer- 
Night's Dream, V. 391, "By the triple Hecate's team." 

29 2 



452 PARADISE LOST. BOOK IV. 

737. Cf. v. 360, "As to a superior nature, bowing low." 

739. coast, region; as often in M. 

740. the ecliptic, i.e. "as then understood, the Sun's orbit round 
the Earth" (Masson). 

741. 742. An instance of Milton's power of making the sound 
an echo to the sense. The rapid movement of the latter half of 741 
conveys an impression of Satan's swift descent, while the slow, 
measured rhythm of 742 suggests rest. 

Niphates, ' the snowy range ' ; a mountain of Armenia, part of 
the Taurus range on the borders of Assyria (iv. 126). 



BOOK IV. 

This book has been described as "the most varied of all in interest 
and beauty." It introduces, at last, " Man, the central figure of the 
Epic," and straightway (i 8) " raises the horror and attention of the 
reader." 

i, 2. O for, i.e. would that that voice had sounded, he who, St 
John. See Rev. xii. 12, " Woe to the inhabiters of the earth and of the 
sea ! for the devil is come down unto you, having great wrath." Apo- 
calypse, revelation, * uncovering '; Gk. avb, 'off ' + fatfirTi', 'to cover.' 

heard cry, i.e. the words " Woe to the inhabitants on Earth ! " 

3. then when ; M. uses this emphatic phrase often ; cf. 838, 970. 
the Dragon, Satan; cf. "The old Dragon," Nativity Ode, 168. The 
title is from Rev. xii. 7 and means ' Serpent ' (Gk. fydicwv). 

10. i.e. the tempter before he was the accuser. Cf. Rev. xii. 10, 
" the accuser of our brethren is cast down." The word devil is a cor- 
ruption of Greek SicijSoXos, 'slanderer,' from 8tapdetv t 'to slander.' 

n, 12. These lines give the main motive of Satan's action against 
man. wreak... his loss, avenge himself for his loss. 

12, 13. Contrast in. 740. The nearer Satan approaches to the 
scene of his task the more he realises its enormity and peril, and the 
less his confidence becomes. 

2023. For this conception of Hell cf. 75 78 and see i. 254, 255. 

24, 25. i.e. rouses the memory of what he was and the thought 
(understood from memory) of what he is and will be. So Samson 
Agonistes is beset by thoughts of "Times past, what once I was, and 
what am now," S. A. 22. In both passages, but more particularly in 



NOTES. 453 

the line in S. A., the influence is clear of Dante's famous words : 
" There is no greater pain than to recall a happy time in wretchedness," 
Inferno, v. 121 23. It has been shown that Dante paraphrased the 
sentiment (an obvious one) from Boethius' De Consolatione Philosophic, 
and that Chaucer (Troilus and Cresside) had anticipated Milton in 
imitating Dante; the latter being "the poet" of Tennyson's familiar 
couplet in Locksley Hall : 

"This is truth the poet sings 

That a sorrow's crown of sorrow is remembering happier things." 
See also Sir Thomas Browne, Christian Morals , n. x. Classical 
parallels have been found in Pindar and Thucydides. 

25. what must be worse, i.e. how he must become worse. One of 
the most powerful features of Paradise Lost is the presentment of the 
gradual debasement and decline of Satan as the evil he works against 
man masters himself "back recoils." 

27,28. Eden... pleasant. "Eden " means ' pleasure.' Cf. 132. 

31. much revolving, pondering many things (tnulta volvens). The 
speech that follows throws much light on Milton's conception of 
Satan. 

32 41. The lines written as early as 1642; see Introduction. 
Addison considered this speech (32 113) " the finest ascribed to Satan 
in the whole poem." 

35. One of the most familiar quotations from Milton. Cf. Pope, 
Epistles, in. 281, 282: 

" Blush, Grandeur, blush ! proud Courts, withdraw your blaze ! 

Ye little stars ! hide your diminished rays." 

37 39- Before his fall Satan was lustrous as the sun itself: now 
his splendour is faded and wan (835 40, 870). 

40. worse ; because it adds fuel to the flame of pride (Hume). 

43. In bk. V. when he is inciting the angels to rebel Satan pretends 
that he and they are " self-begot, self-raised " (860), i.e. not created by 
the Almighty and so not justly his servants; cf. I. 1 16. 

45. upbraided, reproached; cf. James i. 5. 

50. sdeinedy disdained. 

51. quit, pay off, settle. Burke (who quotes Milton much) speaks 
of "the immense, ever-growing, eternal debt, which is due to generous 
Government from protected freedom " Conciliation with America 
(Payne's ed., p. 230). 

55 57. On the one hand, true gratitude is in itself payment : on 
the other, a grateful man, though he may formally have discharged his 
debt, still retains a sense of indebtedness to his benefactor. Bentley 
compared Cicero's sentiment, gratiam autem et qui retulerit habere t et 



454 PARADISE LOST. BOOK IV. 

qui habeat rdidisse (De Officiis II. 20), i.e. he who has repaid an 
obligation is still conscious of it, and he who is conscious of an obliga- 
tion has repaid it. 

66, 67. Cf. in. 102. 

73. me miserable I Latin me miserum! 

79. Satan addresses himself; or possibly the Almighty. 

79, 80. Cf. Hebrews xii. 17, "he found no place of repentance." 

81, 82. i.e. disdain forbids me (to use) that word "submission." 

84. other,.. other ; see X. 861, 862, note. 

87. abide, suffer for. 

90. advanced, raised to eminence ; it qualifies me in 89. Cf. 359. 

94. act of grace, doing penance, asking pardon (cf. Fr. grace}. 

97. violent^ extorted by compulsion, void, of no effect, null. 
Burke quotes these lines, 96, 97, with fine effect in his speech on Concilia- 
tion with America just before the other Milton allusion (line 51, note). 

no. Just as evil is to be his good, so later (ix. 122, 123) he 
confesses, "all good to me becomes Bane" (i.e. evil). 

112. bythee ; repeated for emphasis, more than half', since he rules 
Hell already and hopes to rule the World, thus leaving the Almighty 
only Heaven. Cf. x. 375 382. 

114, 115. i.e. each of the three passions anger, envy, despair 
dimmed his face which was three times changed with the paleness caused 
by them. Cf. such expressions as 'pale with anger,' 'pale with envy.' 
Newton notes that for ire the Argument of the book has fear, 
passion ; used by M., as by Shakespeare, of any strong emotion, deep 
feeling. pale= paleness. 

116. borrowed', see III. 634 44. 

118, 119. An allusion perhaps (as certainly in VI. 788, IX. 729, 
730) to JEneid I. n. Cf. The Faerie Queene, II. 8. i : 

"And is there care in heaven? And is there love 
In heavenly spirits to these creatures base?" 

123. couched with, united with ; it implies lying hid (Fr. couche). 

124 30. Cf. Uriel's words, 564 75. 

126. the Assyrian mount, Niphates; see in. 742. 

132. Eden... Paradise. Masson says: "Eden is the whole tract or 
district of Western Asia [see 210 14] wherein the Creator has designed 
that men should first dwell; Paradise is the Happy Garden [208 10] 
situated in one particular spot of this Eden on its eastern side." Cf. 
Gen. ii. 8, "God planted a garden eastward in Eden." Paradise^ 
Gk. irapctSeuros, 'a park'; a word of Persian origin. 

134. champain head, an open, level summit of open land. 

The garden occupies a plateau or table-land, circular in shape (vin. 



NOTES. 455 

304) and surrounded by a grassy mound or wall (143). On the inner 
side of this mound is a circling row of fruit trees ; their tops are visible 
from the outside. On the outer side of the mound the hill slopes steep 
down, covered with shrubs and trees, the tops of which, though lofty, 
are below the level of the mound and so do riot obstruct Adam's view 
from it over the plain beneath. 

This idea of setting the Garden on the summit of a hill is traced to 
Ezekiel xxviii. 13, 14, "Thou hast been in Eden the garden of God... 
thou wast upon the holy mountain of God. " Dante and Ariosto had 
previously given the Garden a similar site (Keightley). 

Thus when Adam meets and converses with Dante in Paradise, he 
says that he was placed by God "in the uplifted Garden" (nelV eccelso 
giardino) Paradise, xxvi. 109, no. See also the Purgatorio, xxvin., 
where Dante reaches and describes the Garden, which crowns the 
summit of the Mount of Purgatory an obvious piece of symbolism. 
Collins has the allusion in the striking passage about Milton, in his Ode 
on the Poetical Character, 3. 

138, 139. Cf. 693, 694. The second line is intended to suggest 
variety. Cf. II. 621. 

140. ranks ; like the ascending tiers of seats in an amphitheatre ; 
cf. P. R. II. 794. Perhaps Vallombrosa was in Milton's thoughts; 
see I. 303, 304 (note). Verbally ("sylvan scene") there is just a 
suggestion of ^Eneid I. 164, 165. 

151. Cf. Comus, 992, " Iris there with humid bow" ( = the rainbow). 

153. landskip, landscape. 

of, after, following upon ; cf. Wordsworth, Recluse, " Happier of 
happy though I be." The idiom is modelled on the use of ec in Greek 
and ex in Latin to express one condition following on another; cf. e.g. 
Tu0X6s iK. deSoptcbros (Sophocles, (Edipus Rex 454) or Horace's ex humili 
potens (Od. in. 30. 12). Cf. vin. 433, x. 7*<V723, xii. 167. 

156. gales ; the conventional i8th century word for a gentle wind, 
in poems like Gray's Ode on a Distant Prospect of Eton College 
(15 20) ; Collins's Eclogues. 

158. native, i.e. of the trees, flowers etc.; implying 'natural, not 
artificial.' 

159 65. "The fragrance thus wafted out to sea, sometimes to a 
distance of twenty or more miles, is well known to every sailor who has 
been in the West Indies or in the Indian Archipelago" (Keightley). 
Editors quote various similar allusions in classical, Italian, and other 
writers, e.g. Waller (Night-piece] : 

"So we the Arabian coast do know, 
At distance, when the spices blow." 



456 PARADISE LOST. BOOK IV. 

Diodorus Siculus (in. 46) describes how in spring-time, when the 
wind is from the land, the fragrance of the myrrh and similar trees 
reaches the passing vessels, even far out to sea. Probably M. had 
this special description in mind, as it is removed only a few chapters 
from that account of Ammon and Amalthea which was the undoubted 
source of 275 79. 

161. Mozambic; more commonly Mozambique ; a Portuguese 
province on the east coast of Africa, opposite Madagascar. 

north-east ; rather north , according to modern geography. 

162. Sab<zan t of or from iSafo = Sheba. 

163. Araby the .#= Gk. 'Apapla ij cvdaijiw, Lat. Arabia Felix, 
each epithet indicating the fertility of the region. The notion of the 
fragrances and spices of Arabia myrrh, frankincense etc. is a com- 
monplace of poetry; cf. Lady Macbeth's famous "all the perfumes of 
Arabia will not sweeten this little hand " (v. i. 57, 58). 

166. so ; his favourite completion of a simile ; cf. 192, ill. 440. 

167 71. There is a similar allusion in V. 221 23 to the story of 
Tobias and the evil spirit Asmodeus told in the Apocryphal Book of 
Tobit. Tobias was sent on a journey by his father Tobit to fetch ten 
talents of silver deposited with a friend in Media. The angel Raphael 
appeared to Tobias in human form, acted as his guide, and bade him 
marry a Jewish maiden, Sara, who lived at Ecbatana in Media. Her 
seven husbands had been destroyed in succession by Asmodeus who 
was in love with her. To escape their fate, Tobias was instructed by 
Raphael to burn the heart and liver of a fish, since the smell ("fishy 
fume ") would drive away the spirit. This he did after his betrothal to 
Sara, and the plan succeeded: for Asmodeus "fled into the utmost 
parts of Egypt, and the angel bound him " (chap. viii.). 

Cf. Reginald Scot, Discoverie of Witchcraft (1584), speaking of 
burnt incense as a charm against evil spirits : ' ' wheresoever the fume 
or smoke thereof shall come, everie kind and sort of devils may be 
driven awaie, and expelled ; as they were at the incense of the liver of 
fish, which the archangel Raphael made" (bk. XV. chap. 18). Dante 
has the allusion, calling Raphael "him who made Tobias sound again " 
(Paradiso, IV. 48). Sir Thomas Browne thought the story not quite 
" naturally made out" (Vulgar Errors, I. TO). 

168. Asmodeus^ one of the rebellious angels expelled from Heaven; 
called by M. Asmadai in VI. 365 and Asmodai in P. R. u. 151 forms 
closer to the Heb. Aschmedai, ' the destroyer. ' He is thought to be 
connected with the Aeshmfr Daeva (an evil demon) of the ancient 
Persian religion. He is sometimes taken as a type of lust, perhaps 
through the story in the Book of Tobit; cf. P. R. II. 150 52, and 



NOTES. 457 

Tennyson, St Simeon Slylites, 159, "Abaddon and Asmodeus caught 
at me." 

1 70. with a vengeance', an intensive phrase, used here with a certain 
grim humour='in all speed.' Cf. Coriolanus, II. i. 6, "he's vengeance 
proud," i.e. intensely ; but there the use is more colloquial. 

172. savage, wild; cf. P. R. ill. 23, "savage wilderness." It is 
derived through the French from Lat. silvaticus, 'woody.' 

176. perplexed, made difficult (or entangled). 

177. that passed, i.e. that might have passed. 

181. bound... bound. Cf. i. 642 (with the note). Here Satan's 
contempt of the barrier is expressed. 

1 86. secure', implying a false sense of security; cf. Lat. securus. 

192. Cf. the parable of 'the Good Shepherd ,'<?&w x. 

193. One of Milton's prose-works was a treatise on "The Likeliest 
Means to remove Hirelings out of the Church" (1659). It seemed to 
him wrong that ministers of religion should receive salaries, and he was 
ever ready to bring the charge of avarice and love of lucre against the 
clergy of the Church of England. Cf. xn. 507 1 1, and the denuncia- 
tion (appropriately assigned to Saint Peter cf. i Pet. v. 2) in Lycidas 
of the false, greedy shepherds who "Creep, and intrude, and climb 
into the fold" (115). We must remember that he speaks as an enemy, 
a bitter enemy, of the English Church, lewd, base. 

194. the Tree of Life', Genesis ii. 9. 

196. i.e. in the shape of a cormorant, chosen because a ravenous 
bird of prey (cf. III. 431) and thus symbolical of Satan himself; cf. 
Richard II. II. i. 38, Coriolamis, i. i. 125. As a sea-bird it does not 
seem very appropriate in Paradise ; but cf. Isaiah xxxiv. 1 1 (where, 
however, 'pelican' is the correct rendering). 

198. virtue, efficacy; cf. 671 and see III. 586, note. 

199 201. well used. What use could Satan have made of the 
tree? He was already immortal. Perhaps M. means that if Satan had 
eaten of the tree's fruit its saving power might have given him true life 
a regeneration of spirit that, leading to repentance, would have enabled 
him to regain his true archangelic immortality. 

203. perverts', the subject is he understood from " before 
him." 

21014. According to these limits, which indicate, however, 
only its eastern and western points, Eden lay in Syria and Mesopotamia 
mainly in the latter. 

211. Auran, or Hatiran, a district of Syria, about 50 miles S. of 
Damascus ; Gk. Avpaviris. Probably M. remembered that it is men- 
tioned in Ezck. xlvii. 16, 18, as an eastern bound of Palestine. 



458 PARADISE LOST. BOOK IV. 

212. Seleucia', long the capital of Western Asia ; on the right bank 
of the Tigris, about 20 miles S.E. of the modern Bagdad ; sometimes 
called Seleucia ad Tigrin or Seleucia Babylonia. Here, and again in 
P.R. in. 291, M. terms it "great Seleucia" to distinguish it from other 
cities of the same name, such as the Seleucia near Antioch. It was 
built by Seleucus, a Macedonian who became one of Alexander's 
generals, and about 312 B.C. founded the dynasty of the Seleucidce, 
kings of Syria (cf. "Grecian kings"). 

213, 214. A second description of the site of Eden: it was in that 
region of Telassar (or Thelasar) where the "children of Eden" dwelt 
(2 Kings xix. 12, Isai. xxxvii. 12). They "appear from the Assyrian 
inscriptions to have inhabited the country on the east bank of the 
Euphrates, about the modern Balis. Here they had a city called 
Beth-Adina, which was taken by the Assyrians about B.C. 880 " 
(Speaker's Commentary). 

219. blooming, bearing luxuriantly. 

223. "And a river went out of Eden to water the garden," Gen. 
ii. 10. In IX. 71 73 M. identifies this river with the Tigris. 

224. shaggy ; as a wood-covered hill appears, seen sideways ; 
see VI. 645, note. 

22 5 35' The river flowing through Eden reaches the hill on the 
level summit (cf. 134) of which is Paradise. Part of the river goes 
straight through by a subterranean passage and issues in the plain 
(cf. 145) on the other side. But part of its water is drawn up through 
the hill to the surface in the form of a fountain, the waters of which 
become rills. These rills irrigate Paradise and then, uniting into a 
water-course, run down the "hairy side " (135) of the hill to join the rest 
of the river where it emerges from its underground channel. Then the 
whole river divides into four great streams. 

233. See Genesis ii. 1014; c ^- Tennyson's Enid'. 

"And never yet, since high in Paradise 
O'er the four rivers the first roses blew, 
Came purer pleasure unto mortal kind 
Than lived thro' her." 

Dante pictures " Euphrates and Tigris welling up from one spring, and 
parting like friends that linger " (Purgatorio, xxxill. 11214). 

234. wandering ; transitive; cf. XI. 779. 

236, 237. The original texts have a comma after tell (236), not 
after how in 237. Some modern texts reverse this punctuation; to the 
detriment of the rhythm, I think. 

sapphire, sapphire-coloured, i.e. light blue, fount, source; cf. ill. 
535. crisped, rippling; often used of wind ruffling the surface of 






NOTES. 459 

water; cf. Byron, Childe Harold, IV. 211, "I would not their vile 
breath should crisp the stream." See Comus, 984. 

239. error ; in the literal sense of Lat. error, 'a wandering.' Cf. 
Tennyson, Gareth, "The damsel's headlong error through the wood." 

241. nice, precise, fastidious. Supply some verb like ' set.' 

242. curious knots, plots of ground laid out in a fanciful style. 
boon, bounteous (Lat. alma). 

246. imbrowned, darkened ; an imitation of the Italian use. 

246, 247. thus was, i.e. such was seat being in apposition to place. 
Some editors change the construction by removing the comma after 
place, view, appearance, aspect. 

248. gums, i.e. aromatic resins like myrrh and balsam ( = balm], 
produced by the balsam-tree (f3a<rafjt,6devdpov) and other trees of the 
same genus. See 630, V. 23. wept', cf. Othello, v. 2. 348 51. 

250. amiable, lovely; cf. "thy amiable cheeks," A Midsummer- 
Night's Dream, iv. 1.2; and Psalm Ixxxiv. i. 

250, 251. Hesperian... here only, "the stones told of the apples of 
the Hesperides being true only of this place, if at all." It is an absolute 
clause in parenthesis. For the allusion see in. 568, and cf. the cancelled 
passage (especially " fruits of golden rind ") at the beginning of Comus. 

252. lawns, glades, wide spaces clear of trees. 

255. irriguous, well-watered (Lat. irriguus). 

256. Thyer quotes Herrick, Noble Numbers : 

" Before man's fall the rose was born, 

Saint Ambrose says, without a thorn." 

Others of the Church Fathers held the same fancy, which seems to have 
been applied also to the fabulous gardens of Adonis (see ix. 439, 440, 
note) ; cf. Ben Jonson, Cynthia 's Revels, v. 3. 

Part of the curse (Genesis iii. 18) was that the earth should bring 
forth thorns and thistles ; hence the presumption that there were no 
thorns before Adam's sin (Newton). 

258. mantling vine ; Comus, 294. 

264. apply, either 'practise' or 'add.' 

266 68. An allegorical way of saying, with classical imagery, 
such as he had used in his fifth Latin Elegy (In Adventum Verts}, that 
in Eden only one season was known, viz. spring (see x. 678, 679, 
note), and that it was a time of universal luxuriance of growth and 
freshness. M. might well have had in mind some picture seen in 
Italy, e.g. Botticelli's famous "Spring." Cf. too the allegorical dance 
of the Virtues in the Purgatorio, xxix. 

Pan ; here regarded as the god of all nature, and called " universal " 
in allusion to his name (Gk. irav, 'all'). 



460 PARADISE LOST. BOOK IV. 

Graces, Lat. Gratia, Gk. x < *-P lT *s > three goddesses (Euphrosyne, 
Aglaia, Thalia) who personified the refinements and elevated joys of life. 

Hour s> Lat. Horce, Gk. upon ; goddesses personifying the seasons of 
the year; the course of the seasons was symbolically described as " the 
dance of the Hor& " (compare v. 394, 395). Classical writers often 
mention them along with the Graces. 

kd on; the metaphor of a dance; cf. Milton's Sonnet "To the 
Nightingale," 4, " While the jolly hours lead on propitious May." So 
in Collins's Persian Eclogues, ill. 39, 40. 

268. Cf. Marvell's pretty lines on the Bermudas : 
"He gave us this eternal spring, 
Which here enamels every thing." 

26887. He indicates the beauty of Paradise by saying that it 
surpassed various spots celebrated for their charm. In describing 
Nature, Milton "on most occasions calls learning to his assistance" 
(Johnson). 

26872. According to the classical legend, Proserpine was 
carried off by Pluto = Dis (270), to the nether world, unknown to her 
mother Ceres, and became his wife. Latin poets (e.g. Ovid, Fasti IV. 
421 62) made Enna in Sicily the scene of the incident, the worship 
of Ceres having been introduced into Rome from Sicily. 

Scan Proserpin, and cf. the Latin accent and form in ix. 396. 
Line 270 is echoed in ix. 432. Marvell in his poem Upon Appleton 
House says of his pupil in her garden : 

"she 
Seems with the flowers a flower to be." 

271. that, the well-known, Lat. ille so in 272, 275. 

272, 273. " Near the city of Antioch, on the Orontes, lay a grove 
sacred to Apollo, in which was a temple of the god, whence he gave 
oracles. It was named Daphne, and a spring which watered it was 
called the Castalian spring, after that at Delphi" (Keightley). 

27579- See Appendix, pp. 685, 686 ; and cf. P. R. n. 356. 

278. florid, ruddy, being the god of wine ; cf. Dryden, Alexander's 
Feast, 42, " Flushed with a purple grace " (said of Bacchus). 

280 85. Todd quotes Heylin : " the hill of Amara is a day's 
journey high, on the top whereof are thirty-four palaces in which the 
younger sons of the Emperor [i.e. of Abyssinia] are continually enclosed 
to avoid sedition ;... though not much distant from the Equator, if not 
plainly under it, yet [it is] blessed with such a temperate air that some 
have taken (but mistaken'] it for the place of Paradise" M. had clearly 
read this passage in Heylin, who seems to have been his chief authority 
in matters relating to the customs of foreign nations and geography. 



NOTES. 461 

The tradition with regard to the Abyssinian princes is used by 
Johnson in Rasselas, but he speaks of a single palace, and places it in 
a ' happy valley,' not on the top of a mountain. 

280, 281. Abassin, Abyssinian ; the Arabic name. 

Amara ; correctly Amhara ; it is rather a range of hills than a 
single "mount." 

282. Ethiop line, the equator. Ethiop ; the people of Abyssinia 
still call their land Utopia and themselves Itiopyavan. 

283. Shakespeare uses Nilus and Nile, head, source. 

288, 289. The repetition of " erect " is important, since M. treats 
man's stature as a symbol of his sovereignty over the " prone" beast- 
creation, vn. 506 10. 

M. "drew the portrait of Adam not without regard to his own 
person, of which he had no mean opinion" (Newton); and which he 
describes in the autobiographical part of his Second Defence of the People 
of England (P. W. I. 235, 236). 

291, 292. See Genesis i. 26, 27. 

295. whence ; it refers to " truth, wisdom, sanctitude " (i.e. holiness), 
these qualities, not birth and position, conferring true authority. Cf. 
Burke, Reflections on the Revolution in France^ " There is no qualifica- 
tion for government, but virtue and wisdom, actual or presumptive" 
(Payne's ed. , p. 58). 

295 99. This relation of woman to man "not equal" runs 
throughout the scenes in which Adam and Eve are introduced. Johnson 
says, " Both before .and after the fall, the superiority of Adam is 
diligently sustained" (Life of Milton). Such lines as these and 635 38 
express Milton's personal conception of woman's status and capacities ; 
and how much it differed from modern views may be illustrated by 
the single fact that his treatise On Education makes no reference to 
the education of women. There is only a touch of exaggeration in 
Johnson's remark that Milton's works reveal "something like a Turkish 
contempt of females as subordinate and inferior beings " ; the contrast, 
in fact, between Puritan austerity and the exaggerated chivalry of the 
Cavaliers. See also ix. 823, note. 

God in him ; modified by Bentley to "God andim. n 

300. front, forehead (Lat. frons) ; often in Shakespeare. 

301. hyacinthine; a classical epithet. Homer speaks of hair 
(K-O-KXS) 'like to a hyacinth* (uaKtvOivijj avQei 6xofas), Odyssey VI. 231. 
A dark colour, perhaps deep brown, seems implied. Milton's own hair 
was auburn ; the Bodleian Library has a lock of it, considered genuine. 

33 36- See i Cor. xi. 14 and 15 ("if a woman have long hair, it 
is a glory to her : for her hair is given her for a covering" in the margin, 



462 PARADISE LOST. BOOK IV. 

veil). Some think that M. was condemning as effeminate (cf. "but 
not beneath " etc.) the Cavalier fashion for men to wear the hair long. 

-wanton, unrestrained; cf. 629 and Arcades, 46, 47. 

307, 308. implied subjection; M. infers this from i Cor. xi. 8 15. 

310,311. coy, modest. The slow rhythm suggests "delay." This 
line is the obvious original of Collins's line " Reluctant pride, and 
amorous faint consent " ( Verses written on a Paper, etc.}. 

313. dishonest, unchaste; cf. "honest" in the Prayer- Book. 

314. honour dishonourable, Cf. Tennyson's famous line, "His 
honour rooted in dishonour stood " (Lancelot and Elaine). M. often uses 
this classical figure of speech called oxymoron by which two words 
connoting opposite ideas are closely associated. Cf. I. 63, n. 252. 
See i Cor. xii. 23, 24. 

323, 324. A famous example of an idiom often used by Elizabethan, 
as it had been by Greek, writers. It combines the comparative and 
superlative constructions thus : 'Eve fair-^r than all her daughters' + 
'Eve fair-^tf of all women.' So M. writes in Areopagitica, "this very 
opinion... is the worst and newest opinion of all others " (P. IV. II. 98) ; 
and Shakespeare in A Midsummer-Night's Dream, v. 250, " This is the 
greatest error of all the rest. " Examples in Bacon occur in The Advance- 
ment of Learning, i. 4. 8, and 5. n ; and Sir Thomas Browne has it in 
a curiously similar context ; cf. the Vulgar Errors, I. i, where he refers 
to Adam as (in the opinion of some) " the wisest of all men since." Its 
independent existence in Greek and English proves that the idiom, 
though illogical, is natural due perhaps to over-emphasis. It is just 
the sort of combined construction into which people slip in conversation. 

329. recommend, make pleasant. 

332. compliant ; probably in the rare sense 'pliant, easily bent,' 
due to the false derivation from Fr. plier, Lat. plicare ; the true 
etymological connection being with Ital. complire, Lat. complere. 

333. recline Lat. reclinis, 'reclining.' 

334. damasked, variegated. 
337- purpose, conversation. 

340 47. Contrast x. 710 14 (note). 

343. ramped, sprang. 

344. ounce, a lynx (felis uncia); from Persian yuz, 'a panther.' 
347. Note that the serpent is the most fully described (Newton). 
34-8 349. insinuating, winding himself into folds (Lat. sinus). 

Gordian twine, intricate tangle, his braided train, his twisted, inter- 
laced tail ; or perhaps the whole length of his body. 

" That intricate form into which he put himself was a sort of symbol 
or type of his fraud, though not then regarded" (Richardson). 



NOTES. 463 

352. bedward ruminating', chewing the cud (Lat. ruminantes} 
before they go to bed (Hume). 

354. the Ocean Isles, i.e. in the Atlantic, in which, according to the 
classical fancy, the sun set ; cf. Comus, 95 97. In vin. 631, 632, M. 
seems to identify them with the Cape de Verde islands. 

ascending scale ; to be taken, I think, not literally as a reference to 
an astronomical fact or theory, but merely as a metaphor for the 
alternations of day and night. 

355. Cf. Shakespeare, Sonnet 132, "Nor that full star that ushers in 
the even." 

357. failed, that had failed him. The pause, indicating Satan's 
"dumb admiration," has enabled the poet to "enlarge (288 355) 
his description " (Newton). 

360. mould', in M. a constant word for ' material, substance.' 

361, 362. " A little lower than the angels," Psalm viii. 5. 
368. ye ; often used in Elizabethan E. for the objective you. 

370. for so happy, considering how happy they are : their security 
is not in proportion to their happiness. Cf.for in 372. 

374. forlorn, defenceless, "ill secured" (370). 

381 83. An allusion to Isaiah xiv. 9. 

387. for him, instead of him ; or perhaps 'because of.' 

389 91. * Public reason viz. honour and empire compels.' 

public reason ; so in S. A. 865 70 Dalila excuses her treachery 
to Samson on the ground that "the public good" of her country 
required it. 

393, 394. necessity. Perhaps an allusion to Charles's plea for ship- 
money (Newton). Cromwell pleaded the same excuse for the execution 
of Charles. Dryden puts the plea ironically in the mouth of the 
"Panther" (in. 83538). In On Education M. sneers at those to 
whom "tyrannous aphorisms appear... the highest points of wisdom" 
(P. W. in. 4 66). 

398. end, purpose, aim, viz. "to view"; cf. "end" in 442. 

402. a lion. Cf. i Peter v. 8. See I. 428, note. 

404. purlieu, the outskirt of a forest. 

405. couches; some modern texts misprint crouches. 

408. M. always uses the older form gripe, not grip ; cf. VI. 543. 

408 10. The construction is 'When Adam, by beginning to 
address Eve, made Satan turn.' Observe how naturally Satan gains 
(419 32) the information he requires (Newton). 

411. There is, I think, an almost quibbling use of sole(i) 'only,' 
(2) 'unique' (implying 'chief'). Eve is the only sharer in Adam's joys 
and herself the chief element of them. 



464 PARADISE LOST. BOOK IV. 

419. See Acts xvii. 25. 

43 c. possess, occupy; cf. Borneo and Juliet, in. i. 27. 

433. one-, emphatic by position; 'only one.' easy, to keep (but 
also to break) ; an unconscious irony. 

44143. flesh of thy flesh ; cf. Genesis ii. 23. head; " the head 
of the woman is the man," i Cor. xi. 3. 

447. odds, superiority ; often used so by Shakespeare ; cf. Richard 
II. in. 4. 89 ; Titus Andronicus, v. 2. 19. 

449, 450. In vin. 25355 Adam likens his creation to awaking. 
So death is often likened to sleep. 

451. on flower s so the First Ed.; the Second Ed. has of 
flowers. 

453 65. M. had in mind Ovid's story of Narcissus, Metamor- 
phoses in. 407 et seq. 

470. stays, i.e. for awaits. 

475. Cf. xi. 159. The name Eve is thought to mean ' life.' 

478. platane, plane-tree (Lat. platanns). 

483 85. "And Adam said, This is now bone of my bones, and 
flesh of my flesh : she shall be called Woman," Gen. ii. 23. 

486. individual, in the literal sense ' not to be divided ^insepar- 
able ; cf. V. 6 10. Lat. individnus. 

487, 488. So Horace calls Maecenas mete partem animac t and 
Vergil animte dimidinm mete (Odes n. 17. 5 ; i. 3. 8). 

493. unreproved, not to be reproved, blameless ; cf. 987. 

500. impregns, impregnates ; O. Fr. empreigner, Lat. impi'cegnare. 
The word occurs in More's Song of the Soul (Cambridge ed. , 1647, 
p. 205). 

503. envy cf. ix. 264. 

506. imparadised '; used by other writers of the I7th century. Cf. 
Giles Fletcher, Christ's Triumph after Death, 44, "in his burning 
throne he sits emparadis'd " ; and Phineas Fletcher, The Purple Island, 
I. 15. Dante has it in the Paradiso, xxvin. 3. 

511. pines ; probably transitive = ' makes me pine.' Cf. xil. 77, 
and P. R. i. 325, "pined with hunger." 

526. equal with gods. See III. 206, note. 

530. a chance but, it is a chance, just a possibility, that chance 
may lead, etc. : the grim sort of quibble in which bitterness (here 
jealousy) finds vent. 

539. in utmost longitude, in the farthest west. See III. 57476. 

540 43. The rays of the setting sun fell on the inner side of the 
towering rock which formed the gate of Paradise on the east (xil. 638). 

549. Gabriel, ' man of God ' ; one of the seven great Spirits ; see 



NOTES. 465 

in. 648, 649, note. Following, no doubt, some tradition, M. makes him 
in P. L. one of the chief warriors of the Heavenly host, though inferior 
to Michael (vi. 44 46). In the Bible Gabriel is always a peaceful 
intermediary between Heaven and Earth and the bearer of tidings to 
man (cf. Daniel viii., ix., Luke i.), and that is the ordinary conception 
of his office ; see the sketch of Adam unparadiz 1 d in the Introduction^ 
and cf. Fairfax, Tasso, I. n : 

" Out of the Hierarchies of angels sheen 
The gentle Gabriel call'd he [the Almighty] from the rest, 
'Twixt God and souls of men that righteous been 
Ambassador is he, for ever blest; 
The just commands of Heaven's Eternal King, 
'Twixt skies and earth, he up and down doth bring." 
That aspect of Gabriel is presented in P. R. i. 129, iv. 504. 
55i 54 Cf. a similar scene in 11. 528 32 (note). 
553- armoury, weapons; in apposition to "shields," etc. 
555. the even', that part of the hemisphere where it was then 
evening (Todd). 

557. thwarts, crosses. 

560. he thus began. This abruptness expresses his haste (Newton). 

561. When M. speaks of the offices assigned to the Heavenly 
beings he seems to have in his mind the Temple-service of the Jews and 
the distribution of the Levites "by lot," i Chronicles xxiii. xxv. Note 
also the "courses" of service in i Chronicles xxvii., and cf. P. L. V. 655. 

565, 566. Cf. Satan's words in in. 667 76. 

567. God's latest image} the first being Christ; cf. III. 63. 
described', Uriel had directed .Satan's course, in. 722 35. Descried, 

which some modern texts print, gives a more natural sense, but it has 
no authority apart from the parallel passage in IX. 60 62. 

568. aery gait, course through the air. 

569 73. Cf. 124 30. m = on; a common Elizabethan use; 
cf. the Lord's Prayer, "in earth, as it is in heaven." 

580. vigilance, guards : abstract for concrete. Cf. II. 130 
("watch"). 

59092. "While Uriel and Gabriel have been conversing, the 
Sun has fallen to the horizon, so that the sunbeam on which Uriel 
returns inclines from Paradise to the Sun " (Masson). 

592. beneath the Azores, i.e. in the extreme west. 

592 97. He will not decide whether the sun had revolved to the 

west or the Earth to the east, i.e. whether the Ptolemaic astronomy 

(according to which the Earth was a stationary body) or the Copernican 

is right. Cf. in. 574 76, note. For the general purposes of his poem 

P. L. 30 



466 PARADISE LOST. BOOK IV. 

M. accepts the old Ptolemaic system, but he lets the reader see that 
he knows the Copernican. See the notes on vin. 130 40. 

prime orb-, surely the sun, "the great luminary" (cf. prime 
chief), with " lucent orb" in. 576, 589, the "diurnal star," x. 1069; 
not, as some think, the Primum Mobile. 

593. incredible hoiv swift  an absolute construction like in. 76. 

594. vohibil', in form, accent and sense = Lat. volubilis, 'rolling.' 
The Latin accentuation of words derived from Latin was very marked 
in Elizabethan E.; it has steadily declined, the Teutonic tendency in 
E. being to throw the accent forward, e.g. voluble; Aspect, not aspect = 
Lat. aspectus (see 541, III. 266); edict, not edict (S. A. 301). 

598, 599- Cf. "the grey-hooded Even," Comus, 188. livery, dress. 
Thyer notes that Milton is very fond of describing twilight, perhaps 
because of his eyesight. 

603. she; see V. 41. descant, song with variations. Gray borrowed 
Milton's phrase, in that Sonnet which Wordsworth took as a type of the 
Augustan style of poetic diction : " The Birds in vain their amorous 
Descant join." Cf. Vergil, Georg. iv. 51115. 

604. So in Comus, 55760, when "The Lady" sang, "even 
Silence " was enchanted. 

605. living sapphires ; cf. II. 1050. 

608. apparent queen, revealed a queen manifestly a queen. 

614. Cf. Richard III. iv. i. 84, " the golden dew of sleep," and 
Julius Casar, II. i. 230, " Enjoy the honey-heavy dew of slumber." 

620. regard^ watch (cf. III. 534); in 877 = * look' (Fr. regard}. 

628. manuring, cultivation. 

632. ask, require; a common Elizabethan use; cf. The Taming of 
the Shrew, n. 115, "Signior Baptista, my business asketh haste." 

635. author, i.e. the source of her being (see book vin.). 

640. seasons, times of the day, not year (see x. 678, 679). 

641 56. A striking example of the poetic artifice called epana- 
diplosis or 'repetition'; cf. vn. 26, note. The passage illustrates 
well Milton's love of Nature; see ix. 445 54, note. 

642. charm, song ; used sometimes in the wider sense of harmoni- 
ous notes, music; cf. The Holy War ("Temple" ed., p. 293): "The 
men of Mansoul also were greatly concerned at this melodious charm of 
the trumpets." 

657, 658. Pope probably recollected this when he wrote the Essay 
on Man, I. 131, 132 : 

"Ask for what end the heavenly bodies shine, 
Earth for whose use ? Pride answers, ' 'Tis for mine. ' " 

659. our general ancestor', cf. "our general mother" (Eve), 492. 



NOTES. 467 

660. accomplished ; a complimentary address ; cf. Twelfth Night, 
in. i. 95, " Most excellent accomplished lady ! " 

661. those, Newton substituted these, perhaps rightly; cf. 657, 
674. 

665. Darkness, i.e. the "original darkness" (n. 984) of Chaos. 
667 73. A reference to current astrology. 

673. Cf. what is said of the sun's power in III. 606 12. 

674. Cf. Julius Ccesar, iv. 3. 226, "The deep of night is crept 
upon our talk"; and The Merry Wives of Windsor, iv. 4. 40. 

675. none; placed last for emphasis; cf. 704, xi. 612. 

684 88. ' Often, while they keep watch or make the nightly 
rounds, their songs, joined in harmonious measures ("number") with 
the notes of instruments skilfully touched, divide the night.' 

688. divide, i.e. into watches, divide the night  literally = the 
Latin phrase dividers noctem used of Roman soldiers marking the 
watches of the night by sounding on a trumpet the signal for relieving 
guard. Cf. Silius Italicus VII. 154, 155, mediant somni cum buccina 
noctem  divideret. So Lucan uses dividere horas, n. 689. Tennyson 
gives a fresh turn to the phrase ; cf. A Dream of Fair Women, "Saw 
God divide the night with flying flame." 

This part of Paradise Lost inspired, mainly, the graceful Miltonic 
passage in Campbell's Pleasures of Hope ; 11., early ("Till Hymen 
brought..."). 

697 703. Cf. the description of the flowers with which the bier of 
Lycidas is to be decked, Lye. 139 51. The "bower" in Tennyson's 
(Enone owes something to these lines; cf. too the "moonlit sward" in 
his Arabian Nights. 

703. emblem, inlaid work; Gk. fypXrjfJia, 'a thing put on, an 
ornament.' 

706. feigned, i.e. by poets. 

707, 708. Sylvanus, a Latin divinity of the fields and woods (Lat. 
silva, wood), much the same as Faunus, the god of fields and shepherds, 
or the Greek Pan, god of flocks and pastoral life. The three deities 
were often identified. 

711. the hymenaan, the marriage-song; from Hyrnen^ the classical 
marriage-god. 

712. genial = Lat. genialis in the sense ' nuptial ' ; cf. lectus genialis. 
71319. To benefit mankind, Prometheus ('fore-thought') stole 

the fire of Zeus (Jove) ; Zeus in revenge caused Hephaestus (Vulcan) 
to make a woman out of earth who should bring misery on mankind. 
She was called Pandora or All-gifted (Gk. irdvTa, 'all' + Swpa, 'gifts') 
because each of the gods endowed her with some power fatal to 

30-2 



468 PARADISE LOST. BOOK IV. 

mankind. Hermes, the messenger of the gods, conducted her to 
Epimetheus ('after-thought'), " the unwiser son"; and he, forgetting 
the advice of his brother, Prometheus, not 10 accept anything from 
Zeus, married her. Pandora brought with her from heaven a box 
containing all human ills and let them loose upon mankind. Thus 
Zeus was revenged upon Prometheus, the benefactor of mankind. 
Another version of the legend said that the box contained blessings, all 
which, save hope, escaped and abandoned the world when Pandora 
opened the lid. 

M. had made a precisely similar application of the story in his 
Doctrine and Discipline of Divorce, 3, calling Eve "a consummate and 
most adorned Pandora" and Adam "our true Epimetheus" (P. VV. 
III. 224). 

716 19. The construction is 'when, brought by Hermes to 
the unwiser son, she ensnared mankind, so as to bring vengeance (i.e. 
of Jove) on him who etc.' event, issue, result, Lat. eventus. unwiser, 
i.e. less wise than Prometheus. Some take it as a Latinism = ' not so 
wise as he should have been ' (imprndentior). 

717. Japhet = (ji. 'laTreros, one of the Titans, father of Prometheus 
and Epimetheus. Apparently M. identifies him with the Japhet of 
Scripture. Cf. S. A. 715, 716, where, as in Isaiah Ixvi. 19, Javan 
stands for the Greek mxxfavan being the son of the Scriptural 
Japhet, Genesis x. 2. See i. 508. 

719. stole', so the original texts; we find it in Shakespeare; cf. 
Macbeth, II. 3. 73, Julius Casar> n. i. 238. 

authentic, original, genuine; cf. in. 656. 

720. stood. In The Christian Doctrine, n. 4, M. says, "No 
particular posture of the body in prayer was enjoined, even under 
the law " (P. W. V. 34). He makes Adam and Eve sometimes stand 
(XI. i, 2), sometimes kneel (xi. 150), when they pray. 

722. The use of both with more than two things is quite Elizabethan ; 
cf. Venus and Adonis, 747, " Both favour, savour, hue and qualities." 

724 35. The words of adoration offered by Adam and Eve. 
M. may have had in mind Psalm Ixxiv. 16, 17. 

733. fill the Earth = ' replenish the earth," Genesis i. 28. 

735. " For so he giveth his beloved sleep," Psalm cxxvii. 2. Homer 
speaks of the " gift of sleep," virvov dwpov, Iliad IX. 713, and Vergil has 
a similar thought, ALneid II. 269. 

736, 737. M. often shows his dislike of ceremonies and forms in 
worship ; cf. XH. 534, 535. 

741 62. Various texts of Scripture dealing with marriage are 
referred to, e.g. Gen. i. 28 ; i Tim. iv. i 3 ; Ephes. v. 32 ; Ileb. xiii. 4. 



NOTES. 469 

744 47. The allusion is to monachisra and the celibacy of priests. 
751. sole propriety, the one thing held by its owners (Adam and 
Eve) as their exclusive possession. Lat. proprius, 'one's own.' 
756. charities, feelings of love, affections (Lat. caritates). 

763. According to legend, "winged Cupid" (A Midsummer- Nigh? s 
Dream, I. i. 235), the god of love, had two sorts of arrows, one tipped 
with gold to inspire love, the other with lead to repel love (Ovid, 
Metamorphoses I. 468 71). Cf. the Glosse to Spenser's 77te Shepheards 
Calender, March, " He [Cupid] is sayd to have shafts, some leaden, 
some golden." Orsino in Twelfth Night, I. i. 35, speaks of love's 
"rich golden shaft." The allusion is common in Elizabethan poets. 

764. constant lamp ; cf. XI. 590. The antithesis to " constant " 
is " casual " in 767. purple, lustrous. The imagery of the couplet 
is classical; cf. 708 13. 

767. court-amours. Probably M. is glancing particularly at the 
dissolute court of Charles II. Cf. a similar sarcasm in I. 497 ; also in 
P. R. n. 183. 

768. mixed dance. The Puritans greatly disliked the practice of 
men and women dancing together. In Of Reformation in England, II., 
M. unites "gaming, wassailing, and mixed dancing'" in one condemna- 
tion, P. W. n. 402. 

mask) a private form of theatrical entertainment, the forerunner of 
the opera ; so called because originally the performers wore masks or 
vizards. The mask was much patronised by the court (especially under 
the Stuarts) and great nobles from Elizabeth's reign up to the outbreak 
of the Civil War ; after the Restoration mask-performances were very 
rare, so that the allusion here had not very much point in 1667. 
M. was thinking of the past generation to which really he belonged. 
He himself wrote a mask in Comus, 1634 ; but the Milton of Paradise 
Lost, 1667, was a very different person. In the Preface to Eikonoklastes 
he had ridiculed the "conceited portraiture... drawn out of the full 
measure of a masking scene," of Charles I. which was prefixed to Eikon 
Basilike'y and in his pamphlet on A Free Commonwealth (1660) he had 
condemned "masks and revels" as an appanage of court-life (P. IV. 
I. 312, II. 116). See the account of the mask appended to Comus. 

769. serenate, serenade, starved, perishing with cold; similarly 
used in II. 600. Cf. Horace's picture of a lover shivering by night 
outside the house of his "proud fair" Lydia or Lyce {Odes i. 25 and 

III. 10). 

773. repaired, made good the loss of, i.e. with fresh roses. 
775. know to know no more, are wise enough to seek no further 
knowledge. 



4JO PARADISE LOST. BOOK IV. 

77^ 777- "As the earth is a globe, her shadow, the sun being so 
much larger than she is, must form a cone, which moves as the sun 
moves, and on the opposite side. Night and day then in Paradise 
consisting each of twelve hours, the earth's cone would, at midnight, be 
in the meridian, and the half-way uphill to it [the meridian] would be 
therefore nine o'clock, the commencement of the second watch" 
(Keightley). 

sublunar vault, the expanse of heaven below the moon. The epi- 
thet helps to fix how far up the heaven the Earth's shadow had climbed: 
by nine o'clock it had not got as far as the moon. 

778 80. M. always assigns to the Cherubim the duty of sentinels, 
for the reason explained later (p. 68 1). 

778. port, gate (porta); cf. Coriolanus, v. 6. 6. 

782. Uzziely 'strength of God.' The name occurs in the Bible 
(e.g. in Exod. vi. 18), but not as that of an angel, coast, skirt. 

784. as flame ; an apt simile, since the Cherubim are literally 
lustrous beings "radiant files" (797). 

785. M. has borrowed the Greek phrases <?TT' dairiSa, ' on the shield 
side, i.e. to the left,' and tirl 56pv, 'to the spear side, i.e. to the right.' 
We find Trap 1 davida and napa Sbpv used thus. The military terms 
suit the context and lend dignity. 

786. from these, i.e. from the band of Chenibim which had 
wheeled "to the spear" and were to be under the command of 
Gabriel himself. 

788. Ithuriel, 'the discovery of God.' Zephon, 'a looking out.' 
The names suit the duty which Gabriel assigns to these two Cherubim. 
791. secure of , unsuspicious of, not fearing. 
79 2 > 793- i <e> there arrived one who (Lat. qui) tells (namely, Uriel). 

797. files, lines; cf. I. 567, "the armed files." 

798. these, Ithuriel and Zephon. 

799809. This episode is made the occasion of a philosophical 
explanation of dreams in v. 100 21. 

800. Pope has an effective allusion to this line in the famous satire 
on 'Sporus' (Lord Hervey), Epistle to Arbuthnot. See also S. A. 857, 
858, P. R. IV. 407409. 

802. Cf. The Merry Wives of Windsor, v. 5. 54, 55, "ere she 
sleep... Raise up the organs of her fantasy" ( = imagination). 

803. list; a past tense, as in n. 656. 

804. or if. M. varies the construction : 'trying to reach... trying if 
he might ' etc. 

811. lightly, i.e. with only a light touch, for etc. 

812. temper, a thing tempered, i.e. a weapon : abstract for concrete. 



NOTES. 41 

814. "Tennyson used to say that the two grandest of all Similes 
were those of the Ships hanging in the Air [n. 63643], and ' the 
Gunpowder one,' which he used slowly and grimly to enact, in the Days 
that are no more" (Edward Fitzgerald, Letter, p. 156 of Life by 
A. C. Benson). 

815. Nitre or saltpetre is an ingredient of gunpowder ; cf. vi. 512. 

816. tun, barrel ; Low Lat. tunna, a cask, Fr. tonntau. 

817. against, in preparation for. Various battle-touches in P. L. 
(especially in bk. vi.) seem like a reminiscence of the Civil War. Cf. 
Milton's Sonnet "When the Assault." 

829. there, i.e. in the higher places of Heaven, where the inferior 
angels would not "sit." 

830. Cf. S. A. 1 08 1, 1082: 

" thou know'st me now, 
If thou at all art known." 

argues, proves, shows (Lat. arguere); cf. 931. 

835, 836. Apparently M. uses think with different constructions, 
thus : ' Do not think thy shape the same, or suppose thy undiminished 
brightness to be known as it was in Heaven,' i.e. 'do not suppose thy 
brightness to be undiminished and recognised.' Some interpret : ' Do 
not think thy shape the same or thy brightness undiminished, so as to 
be known.' 

840. obscure', in the literal sense 'dark, gloomy' (Lat. obscurus). 

843. these  Zephon points to Adam and Eve. 

845 47. Remembered by Dryden ; cf. The Hind and the Panther, 
ill. 1040, 1041: 

"For vice, though frontless and of hardened face, 
Is daunted at the sight of awful grace." 

There are parallels to this scene in Paradise Regained, where Satan, 
not insensible to goodness, is abashed in the presence of the Saviour 
(e.g. in in. 145-49); 

847 49. A reminiscence of Persius ill. 38, virtutem videant, inta- 
bescantque relic ta. 

848. shape = Lat. forma in its philosophical sense ' outward mani- 
festation of; cf. forma honesti* shape of virtue,' Cicero, De OJficiis 
I. 5. 15. So M. in his prose-works; cf. The Reason of Church Govern- 
ment, I. i, " the very visible shape and image of virtue" ; and again, 
I. 2, "the lovely shapes of virtues and graces," P. IV. n. 442, 446. 

856. Cf. S. A. 834, "All wickedness is weakness." 

862. those half-rounding guards, i.e. the Cherubim under Uzziel 
and the others under Gabriel. Each band had made half the circuit of 
Paradise, and now they met at its western extremity (cf. 784). 



42 PARADISE LOST. BOOK IV. 

869. port, bearing. "Their port was more than human," Comus, 
297. 

870, 871. Gabriel, belonging to one of the highest of the Heavenly 
Orders, has known Satan (an archangel) in the past, and so recog- 
nises him here ; Zephon, an inferior angel, did not (830, 831). 

872. contest. M. always accents the noun, as we do the verb, con- 
ttst; cf. xi. 800, "In sharp contest of battle found no aid." 

886. the esteem of wise, the reputation of being wise. 

891 93. whatever, any; cf. 587. to change... with, to exchange 
for; compare the double use of Lat. mutare. 

894. dole', Lat. dolor, 'pain.' which. ..I sought, i.e. to do, viz. 
*to exchange torment for ease' etc. 

896. object, urge as an objection to my breaking from Hell. 

899. durance, prison, strictly 'imprisonment.' 

thus much, i.e. thus much in reply to your question. The style of 
the speech reflects Satan's "contemptuous" bearing (885). 

906. returns ; probably the subject is "Satan," returns him being 
the reflexive use so common in Elizabethan E. with many verbs now 
intransitive; cf. i Henry VI. ill. 3. 56. Some editors lake folly as the 
subject, and return = ' bring back.' 

911. however, howsoever, by any means. 

925, 'I do not come because I have less power to endure. 1 

926, 927. Either (i) 'I withstood, resisted, thy fiercest attack' cf. 
phrases like 'do thy worst'; or (2) 'I proved myself ("stood") thy 
fiercest foe.' The first way, which makes stood transitive, is preferable; 
for the noun-use of thy fiercest > cf. n. 278, xi. 497. 

927, 928. Book vi. describes how on the third day of the great 
battle in Heaven the Messiah came forth to end the contest, and, hurling 
"ten thousand thunders," smote the rebels down into Hell. 

vollied', cf. Campbell, "From rank to rank your volleyed thunder 
flew" (said of guns). 

93 93 ! i' e - show thy ignorance of what is the duty of a leader 
after disaster; cf. "argue" in 949. 

938. fame Lat. fania in the literal sense report ' ; cf. i. 65 1. 

939. afflicted, struck down (afflictus); cf. I. 186. 

940. An allusion to the Rabbinical view, commonly adopted by 
mediaeval writers, that the angels who fell with Satan were the same as 
the spirits or "daemons" who inhabited the "elements" of earth and 
air. See 11. 274, 275, note; and for the ancient division of the air into 
three "regions," see Appendix, pp. 67476. 

941. put to try, made, forced, to try. Cf. Cymbeline, n. 3. no, 
'* You put me to forget a lady's manners." 



NOTES. 473 

942. gay, fine; perhaps a retort to "obscure and foul" in 840. 

94345. Here Satan is very like the Prometheus of ^Eschylus; 
cf. Prometheus Vinctus 937, 938 (Todd). 

949. Gabriel is replying to Satan's words in 930 33. 

953 56. In these lines Gabriel speaks to the host of Satan's 
followers, as though they were present ; your refers to them not, of 
course, to Satan, whom Gabriel addresses as thou. In Shakespeare thou 
is often a contemptuous form of address. 

958. patron, champion ; see III. 219, note. 

962. areed, advise. 

965 67. drag-, a vivid present, chained; see I. 48, ill. 82. seal 
cf. Rev. xx. 3, "And [he] cast him [Satan] into the bottomless pit, and 
shut him up, and set a seal upon him. " facile, easily passed. 

971. limitary j)A.. limitaris, 'guarding the frontier' (Lat. limes}. 
Satan refers sarcastically to "hallowed limits" in Gabriel's speech (964). 

973 76. Alluding to the throne-chariot of the Deity conceived 
as formed of the wings of the Cherubim. Cf. VI. 771. Satan called 
Gabriel a cherub (971), though properly he was an archangel. 

the road of Heaven. Cf. vn. 576 78, and the description of 
"the floor of heaven" in The Merchant of Venice, V. 58, 59. 

977 79- i- e< the close array of angels spread itself out in the shape 
of a crescent moon. Cf. Fairfax, Tasso, xx. 22, "Like the new moon, 
his host two horns did spread." phalanx, battalion (Gk. <da7). 

980. with ported spears, i.e. "with their spears held in their hands 
across their breasts and slanting beyond the left shoulder, ready to be 
brought down to the ' charge ' if necessary. The Angels have not the 
points of their spears turned to Satan [as the phrase used to be explained 
by editors] ; they have them only grasped in the position preparatory to 
turning them against him" (Masson). "Port" is really a military term. 
Anyone who has ever executed, or seen executed, the command "Arms 
port" (formerly "Port arms"), will be able to picture to himself the 
band of Cherubim with slanting spears thick as the slanting stalks of 
corn a very appropriate simile, used by other poets ; Newton compares 
Iliad u. 147. See VII. 321, 322. 

981 83. Ceres, corn; strictly the goddess of agriculture. The 
beard is the prickles on the ears of corn, careful, anxious. 

984. hopeful, from which he had hoped so much ; or 'which had 
made him so hopeful' (the epithet being transferred). M. is thinking of 
Vergil's expectata seges, Georg. I. 226. 

985. alarmed, prepared, on his guard. 

986. dilated, expanded. Spirits (he says in I. 428, 429) can 
distend or contract their shapes as they please. 



474 PARADISE LOST. BOOK IV. 

987. Atlas, the mountain in Libya on which the sky was supposed 
by the Greeks to rest (n. 306). unremoved, not to be removed ; cf. 493. 

988, 989. his stature reached the sky. Editors compare Homer's 
goddess of Discord and Vergil's Fame ; and refer to the book of 
Wisdom xviii. 16. crest, i.e. of his helmet. Probably M. remembered 
Henry V. n. ProL 8. See also VI. 306, 307. 

990. Cf. the picture of Death in II. 672, 673. The intentional 
vagueness of such descriptions is so effective because it stirs but does 
not satisfy the imagination, rousing a sense of the mysterious and 
indescribable. 

992. cope, "canopy" (in. 556), roof; akin to cape, cap. Cf. Pericles, 
iv. 6. 132, "the cheapest country under the cope," i.e. firmament. 

993. all the elements, the whole fabric of this Universe. 

994. wrack, destruction ; the old form of wreck. 

996 1004. The general idea of the "golden scales" of the Almighty 
is from Homer, Iliad vili. 69 72 : "then did the Father [i.e. Zeus] 
balance his golden scales (xpv&eia raXavra) and put therein two fates of 
death. ..one for horse-taming Trojans, one for mail-clad Achaians; and 
he took the scale-yard by the midst and lifted it, and the Achaians' day 
of destiny sank down" (Leaf). The idea is repeated in . xxn. 209 12, 
with reference to the contest between Achilles and Hector, and imitated 
by Vergil, SEn. xil. 725 27, with reference to yEneas and Turaus. 

M. does not borrow without adding or varying, and we may note the 
fresh turns which he has given to Homer's notion: (i) he identifies the 
Scales with the sign of the Zodiac called Libra'' the Balance' a poetic 
fancy which gives at once a certain reality to the fiction of the Scales 
and a new association and interest to Libra itself; (2) he represents the 
Scales as those with which the Almighty measured out the Universe 
and its elements and this, by adding to the importance of the Scales, 
heightens our sense of the greatness of Satan whose fate is weighed 
in them, and increases the grandeur of the whole scene. 

M. had referred to the Scales Fatorum lances in his Latin poem 
Naturam non Pati Senium, 34, 35. Pope employs them with fine 
mock-heroic effect in The Rape of the Lock, 711 14. 

998. Astrcea ; the constellation Virgo, the... sign, i.e. of the Zodiac. 

999 loor. Cf. Isaiah xl. 12, "Who hath measured the waters in 
the hollow of his hand, and meted out heaven with the span,... and 
weighed the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance?" also Job 
xxviii. 25, xxxvii. 16. 

pendulous, hanging (Lat. pendnlus), i.e. as the central body "self- 
balanced" of the Universe; cf. "hung" in vn. 242 and the Nativity 
Ode, 122. This is what Bacon means by "the pensileness of the earth" 



NOTES. 475 

(The Advancement of Learning, I. 6. 10). In II. 1052, the idea is 
different, though the wording is similar, ponders, weighs. 

1002, 1003. Again M. varies the classical idea: (i) he does not 
weigh Satan against Gabriel, as Homer weighed the Greeks against 
the Trojans, Hector against Achilles, or Vergil Turnus against tineas : 
only Satan himself is weighed. The one weight represents the con- 
sequence (=" sequel") to Satan of fighting, the other the consequence 
of departing: the scale containing the weight that symbolises fighting 
shows, by its ascent, that Satan's chance of success is light weighed 
and found wanting {Daniel v. 27); i.e. that the result of departing 
will be better for him. (1} In Homer and Vergil the descent of the 
scale, since it is weighted with death, is the evil sign. The English 
use of the image is the reverse ascent typifying worthlessness and its 
consequences. 

1004. beam, the cross-piece from which the scales of a balance are 
suspended. To ' kick (or 'strike') the beam' means that one scale im- 
mediately ascends as far as it can, being greatly outweighed by the other : 
hence the figurative application of the phrase to things 'of little weight.' 
Cf. The Hind and the Panther, II. 622 24: 

"If such a one you find, let truth prevail; 
Till when, your weights will in the balance fail; 
A Church unprincipled kicks up the scale." 

1008. since thine, i.e. can do ; referring to "strength." 

loio. "To tread them down like the mire of the streets," 
Isaiah x. 6. 

1014. nor more, i.e. nor said more. This omission of verbs of 
saying (cf. V. 67) is common in Vergil, whose influence on M. was 
so great. Addison thought that in regard to style Milton was affected 
more by Vergil than by Homer. 

1015. fled the shades of night. The action of the next book begins 
at daybreak. Books v. vill. are filled mainly with the account of 
events which preceded the creation of man. Satan, though spoken of, 
does not appear again till IX. 53. 

BOOK V. 

i. now morn. "This is the morning of the day after Satan's 
coming to the earth" (Todd). 

rosy steps. Contrast Lycidas, 186, 187: 

"Thus sang the uncouth swain to the oaks and rills, 
While the still Morn went out with sandals gray." 



46 PARADISE LOST. BOOK V. 

So in vii. 373, 374, and P.R. iv. 426, 427. Some scholars say that 
the Homeric epithet for the Dawn, poSoSckruXo?, refers to her feet, 
not hands; Milton, however, followed the ordinary interpretation 
(vi. 3). 

"Gray "and "rosy" (vi. 3) are, of course, traditional epithets for 
the morning in its early and later stages, clime, region. 

2. sowed  the metaphor of scattering corn, to which the dew- 
drops ("orient pearl") bear some resemblance. Spenser speaks of the 
sky "All sowd with glistring stars," An Hymne of Heavenly Beautie. 
Cf. vii. 358. Shakespeare often likens moisture (746, 747), especially 
tears, to pearl; cf. Lucrece, 1213, 1553. orient, lustrous. 

3 5. i.e. Adam's sleep was not the heavy drowsiness that clouds 
the brain with its vapours after intemperate eating or drinking. Cf. IX. 
1046 51; Macbeth, I. 7. 63 68; Pope, Satires, n. 73, 74 (obvious 
Miltonic reminiscences) ; and Thomson, Spring, 245, 246. 

5. temperate vapours bland ; Milton's favourite word-order; cf. 
vi. 249, and see the note on I. 733, where an illustration might be 
added from Campbell's Pleasures of Hope, " Of cultured soul, and 
sapient eye serene " (an echo of Gray's Elegy, 53). 

bland, soothing, which, i.e. "sleep." the only sound, the single 
sound, the sound alone. Todd quotes the phrase in The Faerie Qncene, 
v. 1 1 . 30. This use of only is Spenserian ; cf. " the only breath" = 'only 
the breath, the mere breath,' F. Q. I. 7. 13. 

6. fuming, i.e. with the steam that rises in early morning; see 
185, 186. For this literal use of fume cf. vn. 600. 

Aurora's fan = the "leaves." The wind which ushers in the dawn 
(cf. S. A. 10, n) stirs the leaves as a fan, and their rustling helps to 
awake Adam. 

1 6. i.e. mild as the west wind ("that breathes the spring," UAlkgro, 
1 8) passing over a bank of flowers. Flora, the goddess of flowers, 
symbolises the flower-world, as in P. R. II. 365. Her association with 
Zephyrus is a poetic convention; cf. Garth's Dispensary, 1699: 
"Where Flora treads, her Zephyr garlands flings, 
And scatters odours from his purple wings." 

J 7 2 5' Keightley cites the Song of Solomon ii. 10 13. Cf. too 
the lines "Wake now, my love, awake! etc." in Spenser's Epi- 
thalamion ; the Song of Solomon is referred to directly in IX. 442, 443. 

21. prime, daybreak, the early part of the clay. 

22. tended so the First Ed.; but in many texts (as Dr Bradshaw 
notes) it has been corrupted into tender. Compare, however, passages 
like IV. 438, "To prune these growing plants, and tend these flowers," 
and IX. 206. blows, i.e. blooms. 



NOTES. 477 

23. balmy reed, i.e. balm ( = balsam, etymologically) ; cf. "corny 
reed " = corn, vii. 321. drops ; myrrh and balm are aromatic resins, of 
much the same nature, produced by the balsam-tree (pa<raj.6di>5pov) 
and other trees of the same genus. Cf. iv. 248, and Othello, v. 2. 
34850: 

" one whose subdued eyes, 
Albeit unused to the melting mood, 
Drop tears as fast as the Arabian trees 
Their medicinal gum " ; 

lines which Marvell remembered in the Nymph's lament over her dying 
fawn : 

" See how it weeps ! the tears do come 
Sad, slowly, dropping like a gum. 
So weeps the wounded balsam ; so 
The holy frankincense doth flow ; 
The brotherless Heliades 
Melt in such amber tears as these." 

The perfume myrrh is to be distinguished from the resin ; it is thought 
to have been distilled from a kind of rock-roses. 

30, 31. I. ..have dreamed. Explained by iv. 799 et seq. "The 
author... shews a wonderful art throughout his whole poem in preparing 
the reader for the several occurrences that arise in it " (Addison). The 
abruptness of the sentences expresses Eve's confusion on just awakening, 
and her agitation of mind. 

35 93. Belinda's vision in the first canto of The Rape of the Lock 
is an amusing but by no means "respectful perversion" of Eve's 
dream. 

39 41. i.e. the nightingale ; the poet's favourite bird, as many 
allusions show. Cf. his first Sonnet, Comus, 234 ("the love-lorn 
Nightingale"),  Penseroso, 61 64, vn. 435, 436, and the fifth Elegy, 
25 28. No doubt, the garden of his father's house at Horton (cf. 
 Pen. 49, 50) was a haunt of the bird. 

his ; poetic tradition (due to the classical story of Philomela) would 
say her, but the male bird is the songster. Elsewhere, however, Milton 
follows the poetic convention; cf. iv. 602, 603. Thomson, Spring, 
speaks of the "love-taught song" of birds, remembering perhaps 
Spenser, Epithalamion, 88 ("love-learned song"). 

43, 44. Contrast iv. 657 et seq., where Eve asks wherefore, for 
whom, do the stars shine all night, to which Adam replies that there 
are "millions of spiritual creatures" on earth, unseen by men, and 
that they behold and praise God's works by night as by day. 
50 92. A foretaste of the much fuller passage in ix. 494833. 



478 PARADISE LOST. BOOK V. 

54 57. It is implied that the figure which appeared was that of 
Satan; cf. in. 636 44 where, to deceive Uriel, he puts on the form 
of a Cherub, winged and with flowing locks as here. 
56, 57. Almost a paraphrase of &neid i. 403 : 

Ambrosiccque coma divinum vertice odorem 
Spiravere. 

ambrosia, fragrance. The adjective is used in a similar context by 
Tennyson, in the description of Aphrodite (CEnone). 

60. god, i.e. angelic being; so in 70 and 117. In The Christian 
Doctrine, I. 5, M. explains why he applies the word ' god ' to angels 
(P. IV. iv. 106). 

61. i.e. is it envy (cf. Satan's words in ix. 729, 730) or some 
reservation, restraint, that keeps you from being tasted ? 

66. vouched, made good with, confirmed by; cf. Henry V, V. i. 77. 

67. he thus, i.e. spake; cf. IV. 1014. 
71 73. See 318 20, note. 

76. The resemblance to Euripides, Alcestis 182, has been remarked. 
There is a striking allusion to the Alcestis in Milton's Sonnet " On his 
Deceased Wife." Euripides was his favourite after Homer among 
the Greek poets. A copy of Euripides with MS. notes by Milton is 
extant, and one of his textual emendations fjdtws for T)5eui> in the 
BacchfB 1 88 is universally adopted. In his edition of the Baccha 
(Cambridge Press) Dr Sandys points out several Euripidean remi- 
niscences in Comus. He notes too what seems to have escaped Milton's 
editors, viz. the fact that the year in which M. bought the copy of 
Euripides above referred to, and may reasonably be supposed to have 
devoted some special attention to the works of the Greek poet, was the 
year which saw the production at Ludlow, and probably the compo- 
sition, of Comus. The direct allusions to Euripides in Milton's prose- 
works are very numerous. See the Appendix to Sonnets vin. and 
XXIIL, with the Notes on those Sonmts. 

77, 78. Cf. IX. 705 709. The allusion is to Genesis iii. 5. 

79. in the Air. Satan speaks as "prince of air" (xn. 454). In 
P. R. I. 3946 he addresses his followers as "ancient powers of air," 
and in P. R. u. 117, "the middle region of thick air" is their council- 
chamber. The idea can be traced to Ephesians ii. 2. Lines 78, 79 
are the appropriate motto of Wordsworth's poem, " Devotional Incite- 
ments." 

84 86. Cf. the scene of the Temptation in IX. 739 41. In xi. 
517 19, Michael warns Adam against " ungoverned appetite," that 
having been the main cause of Eve's sin. 

91. i.e. I found that he was gone ; the sense connects wondering (89) 



NOTES. 479 

with 7(91). In the First and Second Eds. the punctuation is peculiar: 
there is a colon after various and a semicolon after exaltation. Perhaps 
by isolating the clause thus Milton intended an abruptness of speech 
corresponding with the surprise which Eve felt when she found herself 
alone. 

94. sad) seriously. 

98. uncouth, strange. 

102 105. For Milton "Fancy" is the loftiest form of imagina- 
tion ; cf. viii. 461, where he terms it " internal sight," i.e. the highest 
power of conceiving mentally that which is not present to the eye. 
We must remember what "Fancy" means to him when we read his 
line on Shakespeare in IS Allegro, "Or sweetest Shakespeare, Fancy's 
child " (133)- " Fancy " is the normal i8th century word for 'imagina- 
tion.' Cf. for instance, Collins's poems passim (e.g. the lines to Sir 
Thomas Hanmer on his edition of Shakespeare). 

Johnson considered Adam's discourse on dreams to be too philo- 
sophical for a new-created being. But "to find sentiments for the 
state of innocence was very difficult ; and something of anticipation 
perhaps is now and then discovered." 

104. represent, i.e. present, give representations of. 

106, 107. frames, i.e. frames into what we affirm etc. 

115. our last evenings talk ; related in iv. 411 39, where 
Adam reminds Eve of the prohibition not to taste of the tree of 
knowledge. 

1 1 8. so, i.e. as in your case: evil, he says, if unapproved (by 
Reason) in the way Eve has described, leaves no blame. Keightley 
explains so = * provided that it be.' Todd prints unreprov'd. 

129. "A manner of speaking that occurs in Jeremiah xx. 7 : 
'thou hast deceived me, and I was deceived'" (Newton). 

133. each. ..their. A frequent idiom in M. ; cf. vn. 453, xi. 889. 
In Elizabethan E. each could be used as a plural word ; cf. Coriolanus, 
III. 2. 44. 

crystal-, a constant epithet of tears; cf. Shakespeare, Venus and 
Adonis, 956, 957: 

"She vail'd her eyelids, who, like sluices, stopt 
The crystal tide." 

137. arborous roof. Cf. the beautiful description of their bower in 
iv. 690708. 

139. day-spring, dawn, daybreak; so in VI. 521, and S. A. n. 
Cf. Luke . 78, "the day-spring from on high" (margin sunrising), 
and Job xxxviii. 12 in the Authorised Version and also in Coverdale's 
version (1535), "Haste thou shewed the daye springe his place?" 



480 PARADISE LOST. BOOK V. 

141, 142. shot. Cf. IV. 53943, Comusy 98, 99. 
144, 145. Cf. ix. 197 99. lowly they bowed; contrast XI. i, 2. 
orisons, prayers. 

147. nor... wanted they ', nor did they lack ; cf. 514. 

149. We must observe the strong emphasis on " unmeditated," and 
the repetition of "various" in 146 unmistakeable hints at the poet's 
"preference of extemporary prayer over set forms" (Keightley). In 
Eikonoklastes, 25, he sneers at the use of a "service-book." His poems 
are full of these covert attacks on the Church (iv. 193, note). 

150. numerous, melodious. 

151. It is worth while to remember that the lute, now obsolete, 
was in Milton's time a very popular instrument. Cf. the frequent 
allusions to it in Shakespeare. ' * To hear the lute well touched " is one 
of the pleasures that M. promises himself in the Sonnet to Henry 
Lawrence, and without doubt he had often delighted in the skill of his 
friend Henry Lawes, a famed lutenist. 

153 208. The hymn is obviously based upon Psalm cxlviii. and 
the Canticle, " O all ye Works of the Lord." Thomson's poem, 
A Hymn ("These, as they change "), is inspired by the same sources 
and by the present passage. Thomson's admiration of Milton finds vent 
in frequent imitations and in the very Miltonic lines, addressed to 
"Britannia," in Summer: 

" Is not wild Shakespeare thine and nature's boast ? 
Is not each great, each amiable muse 
Of classic ages in thy Milton met? 
A genius universal as his theme, 
Astonishing as chaos, as the bloom 
Of blowing Eden fair, as heaven sublime." 

154. frame, fabric, structure; cf. n. 924, viu. 15. . Bacon uses 
"the frame of things" and "the universal frame of nature" as 
synonyms for 'the Universe* (The Advancement of Learning, I. 8. 
i, II. 7. 7). 

1 60. See 716, note, and contrast vi. 715. 

162. symphonies, harmonies ; see xi. 595, note. 

day without night  "that is, without such night as ours, for the 
darkness there [i.e. in Heaven] is no more than 'grateful twilight'" 
(Newton). See 645. 

163. circle. Cf. The Christian Doctrine, I. 9, "They (the angels) 
are represented (in Scripture) as standing dispersed around the throne 
of God in the capacity of ministering agents." Cf. 655 57. 

165. Cf. II. 324, note. 

1 66. He refers to the planet Venus, which, when west of the sun, 



NOTES. 481 

rises and sets before him, and is called the Morning-star, Lucifer 
cf. the Gk. titles 'Ew<r06pos ('dawn-bringer ') and 3>w<r0<5>os ('light- 
bringer'); when the planet is east of the sun, it rises and sets after 
him, and is called the Evening-star, Hesperus (iv. 605). Cf. 
Tennyson, In Memoriam, CXXI. : 

"Sweet Hesper- Phosphor, double name, 
For what is one, the first, the last." 

fairest of stars ; cf. Iliad XXII. 318, "EaTrepos, 6s KOI<TTOS fr o$pav$ 
iVrarat dcrrijp, and the Glosse to The Shepheards Calender, December, 
" he seemeth to be one of the brightest of starres, and also first ryseth, 
and setteth last." 

171. Newton notes that Ovid (Metamorphoses iv. 728) calls the sun 
mundi oculus, and Pliny (Nat. Hist. n. 4) mundi animus. With 
Elizabethan writers "eye of heaven" is a favourite periphrasis; cf. 
Marlowe, 2 Tamburlaine, iv. 3. 88, "A greater lamp than that bright 
eye of heaven," and Shakespeare's Sonnets 18, 33. See note on 
 Penseroso, 141 ("Day's garish eye"). 

175. The general sense is that the moon, together with the fixed 
stars and the planets, is to resound his praise. 

176. the fixed stars ; cf. III. 481, note. "They are fixed in their 
orb, but their orb flies, that is, moves round with the utmost rapidity " 
(Newton), orb ' sphere ' ; M. treats the terms as interchangeable. 

177. ye five, i.e. the planets; "wandering fire " is partly a trans- 
lation of the Gk. TrXaj'TjTTjs, ' a wanderer,' from irXavaffQai, 'to wander ' 
whence planet. Cf. Drummond of Hawthornden, Forth Feasting 
(1617), where he is celebrating James I.'s thirst for knowledge: 

"Thou sought'st to know this. All's eternal source, 
Of everturning heavens the restless course, 
Their fixed eyes [cf. 176], their lights which wand'ring run, 
Whence moon her silver hath, his gold the sun." 
Drummond (1585 1649) ^ as not a ^ u ^ e * n common with Milton, and 
the fact that his poems were issued in 1656 with a Preface by Milton's 
nephew Edward Phillips is suggestive. In his Theatrum Poetaritm 
(*675) Phillips deplores that they are " utterly disregarded and laid 
aside at present," in spite of their "smooth and delightful" style. 
Drummond's lament for Prince Henry (1613) and his Pastoral Elegy 
(1637) may be compared with Lycidas. He is fond, too, of geographical 
names, especially river-names like "Hydaspes" (ill. 436). And his 
"constant preoccupation with the starry heavens and the Ptolemaic 
universe" makes another link with Paradise Lost. 

five. He has already mentioned the Sun, Moon (then reckoned 
planets) and Venus (166 70): hence only four planets remain 
P. L. 31 



482 PARADISE LOST. BOOK V. 

Mercury, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn. Possibly M. by a mere error 
saidyfc* instead of four (which Bentley read); but I think that he 
intended to include Venus again. In 166-70 he addressed the planet 
emphatically under its special aspect as the Morning-star, giving tft 
particular manifestation of it an individuality apart from that of Venus 
considered generally as one of the seven planets. The Earth can 
scarcely be taken as making up the five, since not (as Masson notes) 
till viii. 12830 does Adam learn that it may possibly be a planet. 
178. The metaphor in "dance" is Milton's favourite means o 
suggesting the motions of stellar bodies ; cf. ill. 579. 580, and ix. 103. 
Shakespeare also applies "dance" (the vb.) to the heavenly bodies- 
apparently to suggest their quivering light; cf. Much Ado About 
Nothing, II. i. 349- Cf. too Shelley, " I sang of the dancing stars, 
Hymn of Apollo. 

not without ; Lat. tun sine. M. is fond of this classical turn of phrase 
(mtiosis); cf. III. 3 . He has it in his prose; cf. the fine passage 
(with its Horatian reminiscence) in the Areopagitica : "I cannot praise 
a fugitive and cloistered Virtue... that... slinks out of the race, where 
that immortal garland is to be run for, not without dust and heat 
(P. W. ii. 68). 

witf.Le. -the music of the spheres"; cf. 625-27. Perhaps the most 
elaborate account of this idea in the classics is that given in the Myth 
Er, bk. X. of the Republic (617, 618). Plato there says that on each of tl 
spheres-he recognises eight-" stands a siren, who travels round with 
the circle (i.e. revolution), uttering one note in one tone; and from al 
the eight notes there results a single harmony." See Arcades, 61 73 
where M. has adapted Plato's words (which are quoted at length in 
my note there), and recalled Lorenzo's speech in The Merchant of 
Venice, v. 60-65; Comus, 241, 1021; Twelfth Night, HI. i. m, 
Antony and Cleopatra, v. 2. 84, As You Like It, II. 7- 6. 

According to tradition, Pythagoras was the only man who ever 
heard this music ; cf. Milton's treatise De Spherarum Concentu : "solus 
inter mortales concentum audisse fertur Pythagoras." Plato explains 
that the music is inaudible because continuous; we should hear it 
there were a break. M. (cf. The Merchant of Venice, v. 64, 65) ofters 
elsewhere a purely moral view that sin has deadened the human senses, 
once so keen. Cf. Arcades, 72, 73: 

"After the heavenly tune, which none can hear 

Of human mould with gross unpurged ear." 

Here, before the Fall, Adam and Eve possess the power which throu 
their sin humanity lost. Somewhat similar is the Ode At a Sola 
Music (1924). 



NOTES. 4 8 3 

iSo. Elements-, see n. 274, 275, note. Among many illustrations 
in Shakespeare of this belief cf. Antony and Cleopatra, v 2 202 
293, Julius Casar, v. 5. 73, Twelfth Night, n. 3. 9, i O . ' 

18183. that in quaternion run. " That in a fourfold mixture 
and combination run a perpetual circle, one element continually 
Changing into another" (Newton). He shows that here and later 
41518, Milton is thinking of a passage in Cicero's De Natura 
Deorum, n. 33. 

Lines 18083 should be compared with n. 91016. 

189. uncoloured, i.e. having a single colour, unvariegated. 

191. advance, raise aloft ; see 588. 

i93 194- Cf. Thomson, A Hymn, "Ye forests bend, ye harvests 
wave, to Him." 

198- Cf. Cymbeline, n. 3. 21, "Hark, hark! the lark at heaven's 
gate sings," and Sonnet 29 : 

"Like to the lark at break of day arising 

From sullen earth, sings hymns at heaven's gate." 
But Shakespeare 'conveyed* the idea from a song in Lyly's play, 
Campaspe, where the lark "at heaven's gate claps her wings." 

202-204. witness, bear witness. I... my song. Bentley read we 
our song, and some other editors find the singular inappropriate, since 
Eve joined in the hymn. Pearce thought that M. was following the 
practice of Greek dramatists with whom "sometimes the plural and 
sometimes the singular number is used" in the choruses (cf. the choruses 
rtS. A.). Perhaps, after all, M. only means that each of the wor- 
shippers speaks for himself. 

205. to give us only good. Editors think that M. had in mind 

that celebrated prayer in Plato": " O Jupiter, give us good things, 

whether we pray for them or not, and remove from us all evil things 

even though we pray for them." Xenophon in his Memorabilia says 

that Socrates was wont to pray to the gods only to give good things, 

as they knew best what things were so." Cf. the Collect for the 8th 

Sunday after Trinity. (Newton's note.) 



i u < ' too luxuriant. 

aptly observed that pamper used to be connected with Lat 
*"*** * 'vine-leaf,' and M. may have accepted the etymology.' 
Really P*mp*r* of Old Low Germ, origin, being a nasalised form of 
the word which we get in p a pi Skeat mentions a Low Germ, vb 
slampampen, 'to live daintily.' 

wedded7 9 'h AUuding . t0 the P rett y classical fan 'y of the vine being 
wedded to (because trained to grow up) the elm; cf. Horace, Od. iv 
5- 30, Epod. n. 9, I0 , Vergil, Georg. n. 367. M. in the Epitaphium 

312 



484 PARADISE LOST. BOOK V. 

Damonis, 65, speaks of the inntiba uva, and in Of Reformation in 
England, I., writes : " I am not of opinion to think the Church a vine in 
this respect, because, as they take it, she cannot subsist without 
clasping about the elm of worldly strength and felicity," P. W. n. 380. 
Cf. Fairfax's Tasso, ill. 76, "The married elm fell with his fruitful 
vine"; and xx. 99. 

221 23. There is the same allusion in IV. 167 71 (a passage 
which Tennyson "hated") to the story of Tobias and his victory over 
Asmodeus (one of the evil angels) as told in the Apocryphal Book of 
Tobit. Cf. The Hind and the Panther, ill. 75054: 

"Still thank yourselves, you cry; your noble race 
We banish not, but they forsake the place: 
Our doors are open. True, but ere they come, 
You toss your censing Test and fume the room; 
As if 'twere Toby's rival to expel, 
And fright the fiend who could not bear the smell." 
the sociable Spirit. Cf. vii. 41, " Raphael, The affable archangel," 
and XI. 234, where Adam says that Michael is not "sociably mild, 
as Raphael." The name means 'divine healer,' or 'health of 
God.' Raphael and Michael (who in bks. VI. and xi. is entrusted 
with high duties by the Almighty) are archangels, and therefore 
intermediaries between Heaven and earth. Addison considered that 
"the angels are as much diversified in Milton, and distinguished by 
their proper parts, as the gods are in Homer or Virgil." See XI. 234, 
235, note. 

230. what, i.e. whatsoever, as often in M. 

238. secure ; it implies a false feeling of security. 

248. after his charge received M. uses this Latin idiom often; 
see I. 573. 

249. Ardours^ i.e. Seraphim. "The poet, I suppose, only made 
use of this term to diversify his language a little, as he is forced to 
mention the word Seraph and Seraphim in so many places " (Thyer). 

254. self-opened ; suggested, perhaps, by Ezekiel'i. ; see vi. 749 
59 for an undoubted use of the Vision. 

2 57> 258. i.e. no cloud or star being interposed to obstruct his 
sight ; an absolute construction, however small ; qualifying star j but 
some connect it with Earth in 260. 

259. not unconform to y like to. 

261 63. Cf. the well-known passage in I. 28791. A similar 
but indirect reference to Galileo occurs in in. 588 90. Galileo died 
in 1642 ; "glass of Galileo" is only a general term for the instrument 
associated with his name. Cf. Pope, The Rape of the Lock, v. 137, 138 : 



NOTES. 



485 



" This Partridge soon shall view in cloudless skies, 

When next he looks thro' Galilaeo's eyes"; 
"this" being Belinda's lock, translated to the skies. 

264 66. He has just said that the earth, as it appeared from 
afar to the angel, resembled the regions in the moon as they appear 
to an astronomer ; now he compares it to the dim speck in the 
distance which the pilot perceives when first he comes within sight 
of an island. Strictly, Delos (see X. 296, note) was, and Samos was 
not, one of the circular group of islands in the yEgiean called Cyclades 
(from KIJKOS, 'a circle'). 

The lines as they stand in the First Ed. have no commas. Some 
editors place a comma before kens, making cloudy spot the accusative 
and taking Delos... appearing as an absolute construction. It seems to 
me preferable to make Delos or Samos the object after kens with cloudy 
spot in apposition. 

269, 270. The metaphor is that of separating grain from the chaff; 
cf. Isaiah, xxx. 24, " clean provender, which hath been winnowed with 
the shovel and with the fan." Fan is from Lat. vannus, whence also 
van = 'a. wing' (n. 927). M. may have recollected Fairfax, Tasso, 
xvm. 49, "with nimble fan the yielding air she rent." winnows, 
parts, cleaves; cf. Thomson, Spring: 

"their self-taught wings 
Winnow the waving element" 

(i.e. the air). There is a similar use of the word in Tennyson's 
early poem The Kraken. Fpr buxom = ' yielding, ' see the note on 
II. 842. 

27174. Cf. Fairfax, Tasso, xvn. 35, 36: 
" As when the new-born Phoenix doth begin 
To fly to Ethiope-ward, at the fair bent 
Of her rich wings, strange plumes and feathers thin, 
Her crowns and chains, with native gold besprent, 
The world amazed stands; and with her fly 
An host of wond'ring birds, that sing, and cry: 
So past Armida, look't on, gaz'd on so." 

A similar passage occurs in Dryden's lines to the Duchess of York in 
the Preface to A turns Mirabilis. 

Most accounts describe the Phoenix as a solitary bird, living "in 
the Arabian woods" (S. A. 1700) for 500 years (so say Herodotus and 
Ovid, Metamorphoses xv. 395) ; at the end of that time (but Pliny 
who also tells the story Nat. Hist. x. 2 gives the period as exactly 
509 years), "when hee (the bird) groweth old, and begins to decay, 
he builds himselfe a nest with the twigs and branches of the Canell 



486 PARADISE LOST. BOOK V. 

or Cinamon, and Frankincense trees : and when hee hath filled it 
with all sort of sweet aromaticall spices, yieldeth up his life thereupon 
...of his bones and marrow there breedeth at first as it were a little 
worme: which afterwards proveth to be a pretie bird" (Philemon 
Holland's Pliny, 1601, vol. I. p. 271). And the first thing that this 
"pretie bird" does is to collect the 'reliques' of its former body (the 
aforesaid " bones and marrow"), and carry them away to the temple of 
the Sun at Heliopolis in Lower Egypt. M. however says at Thebes, 
meaning the famous city of that name in Upper Egypt, which he calls 
" Egyptian" to distinguish it from the Boeotian town. Why he should 
prefer Thebes to Heliopolis does not appear ; probably he is following 
some version of the legend and there are many which has not been 
traced. There is a famous application of the myth in S. A. 16991 707. 

271. towering ; cf. xi. 185, note. 

272. gazed by all, i.e. gazed on ; it is often a transitive verb in M.; 
cf. vill. 258. What attracted the attention of the other birds was the 
plumage of the Phoenix his body caruletim fulgens (as M. writes in 
the Epitaphium Damonis, 188), his tail white, his neck and head golden. 
Cf. Spenser, Visions of Petrarch: 

" I saw. a Phoenix in the wood alone, 
With purple wings, and crest of golden hewe ; 
Strange bird he was, whereby I thought anone, 
That of some heavenly wight I had the vewe." 
The splendour of Raphael's wings (also cerulean) caused him to be 
mistaken for a Phoenix. 

sole bird. Only one Phoenix lived at a time ; tinica semper avis, 
says Ovid, Amores II. 6. 54, and M. imitates him in the Epitaphium 
Damonis, 187 (Phoenix, divina avis, unica terris). Cf. Lyly's Euphues, 
" as there is but one Phcenix in the world, so there is but one tree in 
Arabia, wherein she buyldeth." 

276, 277. i.e. "he seemed again, what he really was, 'a seraph 
winged'; whereas in his flight he appeared, what he was not, a 
Phoenix" (Newton). 

277 85. A favourite passage with Tennyson. 

277, 278. Suggested, obviously, by Isaiah vi. 2 : "Above it stood 
the seraphims: each one had six wings; with twain he covered his face, 
and with twain he covered his feet, and with twain he did fly." M. has 
varied this account in certain details, borrowing something from the 
description of the Cherubim in Ezekiel i. and x. lineaments, his limbs 
generally; not merely the features of his face. So in VII. 477. 

280. with regal ornament. This seems to show that the colour of 
the first pair was- purple ; cf. XI. 241 44. So Gray {Hymn to 



NOTES. 

Adversity} speaks of "purple tyrants," i.e. 'born to the purple,' as 
the phrase is. Cf. too Pope, Essay on Criticism, 320, 32 [ : 
" A. vile conceit in pompous words expressed 

Is like a clown in regal purple dressed." 

The contrast between the first and second pairs of wings, i.e. between 
purple and gold, is a favourite with M.; see IV. 596, 763, 764, vn. 
479, ix. 429. 

283. i.e. colours brilliant as the lustrous hues of heaven ; the re- 
ference to gold suggests that the rich hues of sunset are meant. 

Pope arrayed the Sylphs in The Rape of the Lock (u. 2 13) in robes "Dipt 
in the richest tincture of the skies " ; and Wordsworth speaks of clouds 
"Grain-tinctured, drenched in empyrean light" (The Prelude, iv. 328). 

28385. the third etc. What hue is here intended? Dr Masson 
says violet Dr Bradshaw, purple. Perhaps light blue in fact, the 
colour technically called 'sky-blue.' This would suit the sense of grain, 
and it adds to the variety of the whole picture. 

mail, coat of mail, armour, sky - tinctured '; cf. Comus, 83, "These 
my sky- robes, spun out of Iris' woof" (i.e. out of the rainbow). For 
tf^torast'djed,' cf. "vermeil-tinctured," Comus, 752. The "sky- 
worn Robes " of Pity represent one of the many Miltonisms in Collins 
(Ode to Pity, stanza 2). 

285 87. Maids son, Hermes (or Mercury), son of Zeus and 
Maia the winged messenger of the gods. Probably M. is thinking of 
sEneidiv. 222 et seq., where Mercury is sent by Jupiter to bid ^Eneas 
leave Carthage; perhaps also of Hamlet, in. 4. 58, 59. The point of 
the simile lies in the fact that Mercury was typical of grace and beauty. 
So in the Masque of Oberon Jonson makes a character say that Oberon 
("Beauty dwells but in his face") surpasses even Mercury, whereon 
Jonson's footnote comments, " Mercury... was called the giver of grace, 
XapiSbTys, <f>aidpbs Kal Xeux6s." 

Some of Milton's readers would bethink them of the Jacobean 
Masque-stage, on which the god was a favourite character. These 
lines (285 87) would exactly describe the opening scene of Carew's 
famous Ccehim Britannicum (known almost certainly to M.), and 
I doubt not that the heavenly herald "shook his plumes" in Jonson's 
Penates. For a similar episode, equally suggestive of the Masque- 
literature, which had evidently affected M. strongly, cf. the descent of 
Peace in the Nativity Ode, 45 52. 

288. state, stately bearing, majesty J a common Shakespearian sense 
of a word then used with great variety of signification. 

292, 293. The plants are often mentioned together no doubt, 
from their association in Scripture. Cf. IX. 629, Comus t 991 ("Nard 



488 PARADISE LOST. BOOK V. 

and cassia's balmy smells"). So in Fairfax, Tasso, XV. 53, "The 
winds breathed spikenard, myrrh, and balm around." The cassia 
spoken of in the Bible was a spice of the nature of cinnamon; cf. 
Cotgrave, " Casse aromatique the aromaticall wood, barke, or bastard 
cinnamon." Cassia is now used of an extract of laurel-bark. The 
nard or spikenard (i.e. spiked nard, nardus spicatus] of Scripture (Mark 
xiv. ^,John xii. 3) was a fragrant Indian root. The epithet 'IvdiKos is 
often applied to it. The word comes from the Sanskrit nal, ' to 
smell.' Probably the Jews got the perfume and its name through the 
Persians. 

295 97. In the First Ed. the lines read : 

"and plaid at will 

Her Virgin Fancies, pouring forth more sweet, 
Wilde above rule or art ; enormous bliss." 

With this punctuation, enormous bliss is in apposition to the previous 
sentence; and pouring is intransitive. It appears to me a defensible 
text; but editors place a comma after art, and make bliss the object 
after pouring. more sweet, more sweetly (i.e. than now), enormous, 
out of all rule (Lat. norm a, 'rule'). 

299. " And the Lord appeared unto him [Abraham] in the plains 
of Mamre : and he sat in the tent door in the heat of the day," Genesis 
xviii. i. The whole chapter is in Milton's thoughts here where he 
describes Adam's entertainment of Raphael. 

302. needs', so the Second Ed. ; the First has need. 

306. milky. So in S. A. 550, " clear milky juice " is a periphrasis 
for fresh water. Perhaps in each case milky = ' sweet as milk.' Drayton 
(Polyolbion, xm. 171) speaks of "milch dew," where he seems to mean 
4 sweet ' or * fragrant.' 

31820. Here, as in 71 73, M. remembers Comus, 706 et seq. 
where the magician argues that we should enjoy Nature's gifts and 
' disburden ' her of them : 

"Who would be quite surcharged with her own weight, 
And strangled with her waste fertility." 

321, 322. inspired, i.e. filled with "the breath of life" (Gen. ii. 7). 
The name Adam is said to signify ' red earth.' 

324, 325. i.e. she has only stored (cf. 314) or put away such things as 
are best kept awhile ; for the rest, the trees and plants supply their daily 
wants. In 322 store is used in two senses, viz. ' storing,' and 'abundance.' 

327. gourd, i.e. melons of various sorts. 

328. as 1 that' is common in Elizabethan E. 

331 49. "The housewifery of our first parent" (Addison). 

333. choice to choose. "This sort of jingle is very usual in Milton, 



NOTES. 489 

as to move motion, VITI. 130.. ..And it is not unusual in the best classick 
authors, as m...sneid xn. 680" (Newton). Verbal repetition of the 
sort is thoroughly Elizabethan. Mr Bond in his introductory Essay to 
Lyly's Works (i. 120 24) notes that it is one of the characteristic 
features of style in Euphues ; imitated, doubtless, from the classics. It 
explains and confirms the Folio's reading in Macbeth, V. 3. 44, where 
emendations like load or grief for stuff, or fraught for stuff 'd, really 
proceed from ignorance of Elizabethan usage. 

334 36. The punctuation of the First and Second Eds. (which I 
have retained) seems to show that the sense is 'tastes which are 
inelegant if not well joined.' Some take inelegant adverbially 'not 
to mix inelegantly tastes which are not well joined.' Either way, 
cf. IX. 1017, 1018. bring, i.e. to bring dependent on contrived', one 
taste is to induce another, kindliest, most natural; cf. "the kindly 
fruits of the earth" (The Litany). 

338. Earth, all-bearing mother ; Tretju^rop 777 ; Omniparens. 

338 41. He supposes the garden of Eden to produce the fruits for 
which in after-times different parts of the world were famous; and, as 
usual, he selects places round the names of which cluster literary (espe- 
cially classical) associations. 

339. middle shore, i.e. between the East and West Indies; the 
countries on the seaboard of the Mediterranean are meant. 

340. Pontus, in the N.E. region of Asia Minor, on the coast of 
the Euxine or Black Sea, was noted for its fruit and nut trees. From 
the town of Cerasus the cherry is said to have been introduced into 
Europe by Lucullus, together with its name (Gk. K^MUTOS). In Philemon 
Holland's Pliny (1601) we find: " Filberds and Hazels. ..also are a kind 
of nut. They came out of Pontus into Natolia and Greece, and therefore 
they be called Ponticke nuts. These Filberds are covered with a soft 
bearded [cf. 342] huske," vol. I. p. 446. He mentions similarly the 
introduction of the cherry-tree into Italy from Pontus (p. 448). 

Punic coast, i.e. Africa, more particularly Carthage ; it was remark- 
able for at least one kind of fruit, as the anecdote of Cato and the figs 
reminds us. Cf. Holland's Pliny, " touching the Aflricane Figs, many 
men prefer [them] before all others," I. 442. 

340, 341. Alcinous was the king of the Phaeacians, a fabulous race 
whom Homer places in the island of Scheria (afterwards identified with 
Corcyra, now Corfu whence Corey ra was called by Roman poets 
Ph&acia tellus ; but probably Scheria was quite mythical). He enter- 
tained Odysseus, and Homer describes his palace and gardens at 
length. M. refers in two other passages to those books (vi. xin.) 



4QO PARADISE LOST. BOOK V. 

of the Odyssey in which Odysseus stays "where Alcinous reigned"; 
cf. the Vacation, Exercise, 48 52 (alluding to Od. vin.), and P. L. 
ix. 43941. See also his third Elegy, 43, 44 : 

Non dea tarn variis omavit floribus hortos 
Alcinoi Zephyro Chloris amata levi. 

342. rined; some texts print rind (i.e. the noun); but the First 
and Second Eds. read rin'd, and M. meant it to be a participial 
adjective, 'having a smooth rine (i.e. rind).' I think that we may 
fairly hyphen the words and make a compound "smooth-rined," on 
the analogy of "smooth-dittied," "smooth-haired," in Comus, 86, 716, 
and "smooth-shaven" in  Penseroso, 66. It seems to me best to 
make the adj. qualify coat. 

345. Cf. Comus, 46, 47 : 

"Bacchus, that first from out the purple grape 

Crushed the sweet poison of misused wine." 

inoffensive, not intoxicating, as it became through " the later invention 
of fermenting the juice of the grape " (Thyer). must, new wine ; Lat. 
mitstum. Cf. The Faerie Queene, vil. 7. 39. meatis, sweet beverages. 

347, 348. nor. ..wants. The construction seems to be due to a 
combination of the personal use of want (which here would be plural) 
and the impersonal, which is singular =' there wants.' "An abundance 

of impersonal verbs is a mark of an early stage in a language There 

are many more impersonal verbs... in Elizabethan than in modern 
English" (Abbott). 

349. the shrub unfumed. " That is, not burnt and exhaling smoke 
as in fumigations, but with its natural scent " (note in Todd). 

354 57. One of those passing touches in which M. reveals his 
republicanism and dislike of ostentation. 

Scan retinue, as in P. R. II. 419, "What followers, what 
retinue canst thou gain?" So in Tennyson, Ay liner's Field, "The 
dark retinue reverencing death"; and in Guinevere. Cf. revenue in 
Shakespeare, e.g. in Hamlet, ill. 2. 63. besmeared ; editors compare 
Horace's aurum vestibus illilum (Odes iv. 9. 14). 

360 62. See in. 73638. Cf. Adam's meeting with Michael in 
XI. 249, and 29698. 

for ; the clause gives the reason why Adam has addressed the angel 
as " Native of Heaven." Cf. Arcades, 26, 27 : 

" Stay, gentle Swains, for, though in this disguise, 
I see bright honour sparkle through your eyes " ; 
where "for I see" explains why they have been called "gentle," i.e. 
well-born. Cf. n. 12 14, x. 46062. 



NOTES. 4QI 

371. Virtue. The word must not be pressed, as in P. L. Raphael 
is an archangel (cf. vn. 41). Heywood in his Hierarchic (1635) ranks 
Raphael among the Powers (^owtcu). 

378. Pomona, the Roman goddess of fruit (Lat. pomum) ; she 
" might well be supposed to have a delightful arbour " (Newton). 

381, 382. Alluding to Q judicium Paridis. The three goddesses, 
Hera, Athena and Aphrodite, each claimed the golden apple inscribed 
with the words " to the fairest " which Eris (Strife) had thrown among 
the guests at the nuptials of Peleus and Thetis. The matter was 
referred to the shepherd Paris (afterwards the lover of Helen), who 
decided in favour of Aphrodite "the fairest goddess feigned." 
Perhaps to many readers the story is most familiar through Tennyson's 
CEnone. 

Ida, the " many-fountained " mountain (iroviridal- "I5a, Iliad vill. 
47) in Mysia, Asia Minor. Spenser speaks of Paris as "The Shepheard 
of Ida that judged beauties Queene," in The Shepheards Calender, 
August. 

384. virtue-proof, strong in (or ' through ') virtue. Commonly in 
these compounds proof implies being strong against a thing. Thus in 
Love's Labour's Lost, v. 2. 513, shame-proof = ' strong against, i.e. im- 
penetrable to, shame ' ; and in Arcades, 89, " branching elm star- 
proof" means that the leaves are so dense that the star-light cannot 
penetrate. 

385 87. " And the angel came in unto her, and said, Hail, thou 
that art highly favoured, the Lord is with thee : blessed art thou among 
women," Luke i. 28. Cf. P. R. II. 6668. second Eve ; so Christ is 
"the last Adam," i Cor. xv. 45. 

388. Cf. XL 159, " Eve, rightly called Mother of all Mankind." 

393. her, the table's ; he avoids using its. 

394. all autumn piled, i.e. had all the produce of the autumn 
piled on it ; the auxiliary verb can easily be understood from 392. 

394 395- i- e - the different charms of spring and autumn (as we 
know them) were then united in one continuous season. Cf. IV. 
266 68, which anticipates the metaphor ("danced") of this passage. 
Drummond, A Cypress Grove, uses the same image: "One year is 
sufficient to behold all the magnificence of nature, nay, even one day 
and night; for more is but the same brought again. This sun, that 
moon, these stars, the varying dance of the Spring, Summer, Autumn, 
Winter, is that very same which the golden age did see " ( Works, 
II. 256). 

396. "A terrible bathos after the beautiful imagery, but shows 
Milton's simplicity" (Tennyson). 



49 2 PARADISE LOST. BOOK V. 

Addison had noted that the line is one of the few colloquialisms in 
Paradise Lost ; another being X. 736. 

407. We hear of "angels' food," Psalm Ixxviii. ?<. See 
633. 

409. as doth the singular verb is required, substance (not 
substances] being understood from 408. 

409 13. Cf. The Christian Doctrine, I. 7, "spirit being the 
more excellent substance, virtually and essentially contains within itself 
the inferior one (i.e. body) ; as the spiritual and rational faculty con- 
tains the corporeal," P. W. iv. 181. The drift of Milton's thought 
becomes clearer when we read lines 469 et seq., where he dwells upon 
what he conceives to be the radical connection between matter and 
spirit. 

412. concoct, digest. 

415 18. See 18083. 

419, 420. M. regards the spots in the moon as vapours not entirely 
assimilated to her substance, and therefore visible against their luminous 
background. So in vui. 145, 146 he compares them to clouds. A 
somewhat similar notion is found in Pliny's Natural History ; cf. 
Philemon Holland's translation: "Now that planets are fed doubtlesse 
with earthly moisture, it is evident by the Moone: which so long as 
she appeaveth by the halfe in sight, never sheweth any spots, because 
as yet she hath not her full power of light sufficient, to draw humour 
unto her. For these spots be nothing els but the dregs of the earth, 
caught up with other moisture among the vapors" (1601 ed., vol. II. 
p. 7). It seems as if the true explanation of the spots, that they 
are unevennesses on the surface of the moon caused by mountains 
and valleys, were really known to Milton; cf. I. 287 91. 

425, 426. For the poetic fancy that the sun rises from and sets in 
the sea, cf. Coinus, 95 97. 

427, 428. The introduction of nectar (cf. 633) was doubtless due to 
its classical associations as the drink of the gods. There are occasions 
when Milton's classical touches seem a little out of harmony with the 
Scriptural character of his theme. Instances of this confusion of effect 
are very marked in Lycidas. 

428, 429. A recollection of Arcades, 50, " [I] from the boughs brush 
off the evil dew." Everyone will recall Gray's " Brushing with hasty 
steps the dew away," Elegy, 99. The emphatic word is " mellifluous " : 
the dews of Eden are of no common kind. 

430. pearly grain, i.e. dew-drops; cf. 2, 746, 747. But some take 
it to mean manna; cf. Exodus xvi. 14. 

433. nice t dainty, fastidious. It is a characteristic epithet of 



NOTES. 493 

the 1 8th century, "Augustan" school of writers; cf. Pope, Essay on 
Criticism, 285, 286: 

" Thus critics of less judgment than caprice, 
Curious, not knowing, not exact but nice." 

434 36. i.e. the angel did actually eat not merely appear to 
eat, as theologians explain in such cases. Bishop Newton remarks 
" Several of the Fathers and ancient Doctors were of opinion, that 
the Angels did not really eat, but only seemed to do so; and they 
ground that opinion principally upon what the Angel Raphael says in 
the book of Tobit, xii. 19, ' All these days did I appear unto you, but 
I did neither eat nor drink, but you did see a vision.'" 

We have already had an allusion to the Book of Tobit in lines 
221 23; Keightley notes that it was evidently a favourite with M.; 
probably he was here glancing at the verse cited by Newton. 

435. gloss, interpretation, viz. of passages like Gen. xix. 3. 

438. what redottnds, i.e. all that is redundant, not assimilated. 

439 43. Cf. Of Reformation in England, II., "Their trade 
being, by... alchemy to extract heaps of gold and silver out of the drossy 
bullion of the people's sins," P. W. II. 403. The point of the present 
comparison is that " as by means of the heat produced by coal, the 
alchemist can drive off the grosser particles and leave the pure gold 
remaining ; so the internal heat of the angelic body drives off through 
the pores the innutritious particles of the food " (Keightley). 

empiric, experimentising ; Gk. ^X7retptc6s. Used with some notion of 
contempt = 'quack ' ; cf. Of Reformation, I., " Did he go about to pitch 
down his court, as an empiric does his bank, to inveigle in all the 
money of the country?" (P. IV. II. 376). drossiest, full of impurities; 
cf. I. 704, and see The Faerie Queene, n. 7. 36, " Some scumd the 
drosse that from the metall came." 

443. 444. Eve ministered. The passage illustrates Milton's con- 
ception of the relation of the sexes. 

444. flowing cups', a Shakespearian phrase; cf. Henry V. IV. 
3* 55> "Be in their flowing cups freshly remember'd," and Othello, 
n. 3. 60. So in Lovelace's famous Song, To Althea from 
Prison : 

"When flowing cups run swiftly round 

With no allaying Thames ; 
Our careless heads with roses bound, 
Our hearts with loyal flames." 

445. crowned, brimming ; a reminiscence of Homer's (Iliad I. 
470) Kpijrijpas eireffTtyavTo iroroio (to which Vergil gave a fresh turn 
in his socii cratera coronant Georg. II. 528). Cf. The Faerie Queene, 



494 PARADISE LOST. BOOK V. 

I. 3. 31, and Dryden, &neid, in. 688, "My sire Anchises crowned a 
cup with wine " (where, however, corona is used literally of the chaplet 
of flowers). 

447. Sons of God. The phrase (from Gen. vi. 2) has been taken to 
mean either the angels or the pious descendants of Seth. Here (and in 
P. R. II. 178, 179) M. apparently adopts the former view; but in xi. 
621, 622, the other. Josephus, Antiq. I. iii. I, makes "sons of God" = 
angelic beings. 

451,452. See xi. 531, note. 

460. framed; it implies care, skill; cf. "wary" in 459. 

467. i.e. what comparison can there be between Heaven's feasts 
and this ? compare ; not uncommon as a noun in Shakespeare ; cf. 
Venus and Adonis, 8, " The field's chief flower sweet above compare." 
See VI. 705. 

468. Hierarch, member of the Hierarchies, i.e. ' heavenly being ' ; 
used once elsewhere, xi. 220 (of Michael). 

469 et seq. This is one of the passages in which the treatise on The 
Christian Doctrine is valuable as explaining Milton's philosophical and 
theological views. Chapter 7 of the first book treats "Of the Creation," 
and he expounds at great length his conception of the "one first matter." 
His views, as admirably summarised by Dr Masson, amount to this 
" that all created Being, whether called soul or body, consists of but 
one primordial matter, a direct efflux from the very substance of the 

Eternal and Infinite Spirit that there are graduated varieties or 

sorts of this first material efflux from Deity, all radically one, but 
differentiated into an ascending series of forms, from the inorganic 
as the lowest, up to the vegetable, thence to the animal, thence to the 
human, and so to the angelic, or nearest in nature to the Divine 
original." This passage in fact gives us what Adam afterwards (509) 
calls "the scale of Nature." 

The long discourses and explanations which Milton puts in the 
mouth of Raphael seem to come much more naturally from him, an 
archangel, than the discourses with which Beatrice enlightens Dante in 
the Paradiso, e.g. on Free Will (v.), the Atonement (vn.), the motion 
of the heavenly bodies, such as the Primum Mobile (xxvn.), the 
Creation (xxix.). 

471. created all, i.e. all things created such (namely "good ") to a 
perfect degree, and all made of one first original matter. Cf. The 
Christian Doctrine, I. 7, "For the original matter of which we speak, 
is not to be looked upon as an evil or trivial thing, but as intrinsically 
good, and the chief productive stock of every subsequent good. It was 
a substance, and derivable from no other source than from the fountain 



NOTES. 495 

of every substance, though at first confused and formless, being after- 
wards adorned and digested into order by the hand of God" (P. W. 
IV. 179). Cf. VII. 233. 

The influence of these lines is very marked in the Essay on Man, I. ; 
cf. especially 233 46, and the great passage, "All are but parts of 
one stupendous whole " etc. 

478. This idea (cf. 497) of body refining into spirit (i.e. of matter 
passing from a lower to a higher stage) is very characteristic of Milton. 
Cf. Camus, 45963 : 

"Till oft converse with heavenly habitants 
Begin to cast a beam on the outward shape, 
The unpolluted temple of the mind, 
And turns it by degrees to the soul's essence, 
Till all be made immortal." 

In the same speech he passes (467 69) to the converse idea that, 
as the body by self-discipline may become soul, so the soul by self- 
indulgence may become body: 

" The soul grows clotted by contagion, 
Imbodies, and imbrutes, till she quite lose 
The divine property of her first being." 

Cf. again vi. 660, 661, IX. 166. Newton thinks, very justly, that the 
whole idea was suggested by the Scriptural doctrine (cf. i Cor. xv.) of 
a natural body changed into a spiritual ; perhaps also the influence of 
Plato is to be traced ; cf. the notes on the passage in Comus. 

482. To take the first two feet as cases of inverted rhythm gives 
a perfectly Miltonic effect " spirits | odorjous " etc. 

483. scale, ladder, Lat. scala ; cf. 509, vni. 591. Pope speaks of 
the continuity of Nature, "Where, one step broken, the great scale's 
destroyed," Essay on Man, i. 244. Cf. also Thomson, Spring: 

"who knows, how raised to higher life, 
From stage to stage, the vital scale ascends?" 

sublimed, raised; the metaphor (as in i. 235) is probably from the 
science of chemistry, in which to sublime is to ' raise or elevate by 
heat.' Cf. Bacon, "Metals are sublimed by joining them with 
mercury or salts." Cf. the chemical term * sublimate.' 

487 90. This contrast between intuition and discourse (in its old 
sense) occurs often: intuition, as its derivation (Lat. intueri, 'to look 
into ') implies, being the faculty of seeing into things straightway and 
apprehending truth without any process of reasoning: discourse, the 
lower faculty of understanding things by means of reasoning processes. 
M. naturally assigns the higher power to the angels ; so in The 
Christian Doctrine, i. 9, he says that the good angels understand by 



496 PARADISE LOST. BOOK V. 

means of " revelation." Compare the analysis of the different types of 
the intellectual faculty in the Piirgatorio, xvm., and the Paradiso, 
xxix. ; also Browne, Religio Medici^ I. xxxiii. 

493. proper, i.e. my own ; Lat. proprins. 

499. The underlying doctrine (taught by many of the Father*?) is 
that Adam, had he not sinned and thereby become "mortal" (viu. 
331), i.e. liable to death, would have been translated to Heaven. 

504. your fill, i.e. enjoy to your fill. This adverbial use is Biblical ; 
cf. Deuteronomy xxiii. 24, "When thou comest into thy neighbour's 
vineyard, then thou mayest eat grapes thy fill at thine own pleasure." 
M. has the expression (now colloquial) in Sonnet xiv. 14, "And drink 
thy fill of pure immortal streams." Cf. Leviticus xxv. 19, "And the 
land shall yield her fruit, and ye shall eat your fill." 

509, 510. "Matter" (472) is the "centre," and "Nature" the 
" scale " which reaches to the utmost of our conceptions, all round. 
By ascending this ladder, i.e. by the study of Nature, we are led to 
God (Richardson). 

520. " The sentences here are very short, as everything ought to be 
in the preceptive way. Quicquid pracipies, esto brevis, is the rule of 
Horace de Arte Poetica, 335 " (Newton). 

5 7 5 34' A discourse on free will and predestination, similar to 
that in in. 96 128. It is one of the subjects whereof the fallen 
angels dispute in n. 557 61 ; and of course M. treats it at great 
length in The Christian Doctrine, P. IV. IV. 43 77. 

535. Cf. The Christian Doctrine, I. 3, " in assigning the gift of 
free will, God suffered both men and angels to stand or fall at their 
own uncontrolled choice " (P. W. iv. 38). 

538. i.e. on no other surety ; in these cases none, from its peculiar 
position, expresses emphasis. Cf. XI. 612. 

543. from what... into what. An antithetic turn of phrase used by 
M. more than once. Cf. I. 91, 92. 

546 48. Cf. the allusion to " celestial voices " in iv. 68088. 

552. single is yet so just, i.e. since he has laid on us only one 
command, whereas he might have imposed many, we ought to feel 
bound to obey that command, even if it were not "just," as it is. 

SS^, 557. relation, report, account; a common Elizabethan use. 
Cf. The Tempest, v. 164. Richardson noted the Horatian reminiscence 
(Odes II. 13. 29, 30) in 557 : 

Utnimque sacro digna silentio 
Mirantur umbra dicere. 

563. We may compare the long episodical description that follows of 
the expulsion of the apostate angels from Heaven with Eneas' narrative 



NOTES. 497 

to Dido of the fall of Troy and of his subsequent fortunes. Eneas' 
monologue occupies two books (II., in.) of the ^Lneid Raphael is 
briefer; his narrative closes at 892 of bk. vi. Such episodical narra- 
tives of what preceded the commencement of the action of the poem 
have been part of the machinery of the epic, since Homer made 
Odysseus relate his adventures to Alcinous (Newton). 

Milton was bound to describe these events; and he appropriately 
lays the description in the mouth* of one who had taken part in them. 
The obvious danger that besets a passage of this kind in which we are 
lifted from earth to Heaven is, that the poet may seem to materialise 
and degrade things spiritual and supernatural by delineating them under 
imagery and in language associated with things corporal and earthly. 
M. warns us of this difficulty at the outset (571 74); and hints that 
after all earth may be but a symbol of Heaven an idea which under 
various forms has occurred to many thinkers. Dante also dwells on 
the impossibility of describing (" figuring") Paradise (xxni. 61). The 
other " episode" in Paradise Lost occurs in bks. XL, xn. ; see note on 
xi. 356 58. Newton notes that the form of the beginning (563, 564) 
of Raphael's narrative recalls the opening words of Eneas in SEneidu. 3. 

Spenser's two Hymnes Of Heavenly Love and Of Heavenly Beautie 
are like an introduction to Milton's narrative of the fall of the angels 
and the subsequent creation of Man and the Universe. No part of 
Spenser presents closer parallels to Paradise Lost. 

566. remorse, pity. 

578. these Heavens, i.e. the sky above them ; not the upper Heaven 
or Empyrean in which the Deity dwells (Masson). 

579. upon her centre poised. See vn. 242. In each passage there 
is an allusion to Ovid's account of the earth hanging ponderibus librata 
suis (Metamorphoses i. 13). So Pope, Temple of Fame : 

" In air self-balanced hung the globe below, 

Where mountains rise and circling oceans flow." 
when on a day. This curious phrase occurs in Cowper's Heroism, 1 1. 
580 82. M. refers to the definition of 'Time as the measure of 
motion'; cf. Aristotle, Physics IV. n. 219, TOVTO ydp ecm? 6 XP OVO *> 
apidfibs Ktir7<rews Kara TO Trporepov KO.I vvrepov: and Phys. VIII. i. 251, 
ei 8ri CCTTIV 6 XP VO * Kwfjffew^ dpiOJibs 77 Kivrjffis TIS.... The same idea had 
occurred in Plato, Timaus 37 039 D. Cf. Milton's second epitaph 
on Hobson the carrier : 

"Time numbers motion, yet (without a crime 

'Gainst old truth) motion numbered out his time." 
Milton's purpose in 580 82 is to justify his introduction of the 
notion of Time in the word "day," 579: for that which he is 

P. L. 32 



498 PARADISE LOST. BOOK V. 

describing took place before the creation of the universe : whereas, 
says Plato, "days and nights and months and years -were itot before 
the universe was created. ..he (the Deity) devised the generation of 
them along with the fashioning of the universe," Timaus 37 D; 
and again, "Time then has come into being along with the universe" 
Xpovos 5' ow per' otpavov ytyovcv, Timctus 38 B. See Spenser's Hymne 
of Heavenly Love, 11 28. It would be impossible to discuss the 
matter : we can only note that M. dissents from Plato both here and 
in The Christian Doctrine, I. 7, where he writes : " There is no 
sufficient foundation for the common opinion, that motion and time 
(which is the measure of motion) could not, according to the ratio of 
priority and subsequence, have existed before this world was made " 
(P. W. iv. 185). 

by. ..past and future, i.e. by the standard of or, in relation 
to ; cf. Aristotle's Kara r6 irpbrcpov Kal tio-repov, and the extract in 
italics from The Christian Doctrine. 

582 87. Editors refer to r Kings xxii. ig,Job i. 6. 
583. great year. He has borrowed Plato's conception of the 
Annus Magnus. This was the vast period (estimated by Mr Adam in 
his pamphlet on the Nuptial Number of Plato to be 36,000 years) at the 
close of which the heavenly spheres, having completed their several 
revolutions, come back to the position whence they started. Cf. the 
passage from Censorinus (a scientific writer of Rome of the 3rd century 
A.D.) quoted by Mr Newman, Politics of Aristotle, I. 576, Est pr&tcrea 
annus... quern soils luna vagarumque quinque stellarum orbes conficiunt, 
cum ad idem sigitum, ubi quondam simul fuerunt, una referuntur. 
Cf. too Heywood's Hierarchie (1635), p. 147 : 

"There is a yeare, that in Times large progresse 

Is Annus Magnus call'd: 

in this 'tis sayd, 

The Stars and Planets, howsoeuer sway'd, 
Be they or fixt, or wandring; in this yeare 
Returne to their first state, and then appeare 
In their owne Orbs, unwearied, and instated 
As fresh and new as when at first created " ; 

and the Religio Medici, i. vi. : "To see ourselves again, we need not 
look for Plato's year ; every man is not only himself... men are lived over 
again." Marvell (The First Anniversary, 17, 18), contrasting unpro- 
gressive rulers with Cromwell under an astronomical simile, says : 
"And though they all Platonic years should reign, 

In the same posture [they] would be found again." 
M. conceives some such Platonic cycles to have existed "in 



NOTES. 499 

eternity," and the close of one of them to have been marked by the 
event of which he proceeds to speak. There is a glance at the same 
thought in 861, 862. Wordsworth in the poem on his infant daughter 
("Hast thou then survived!") evidently had Milton's lines in mind, 
though he seems to have quoted from memory, substituting " Heaven's 
eternal year " for "great. " 

587. Hierarchs... orders ; see Appendix, pp. 680 82. 

588. advanced, uplifted; cf. I. 536, and King John, II. 207, 
"These flags of France, that are advanced here." 

589. gonfalons, flags, ensigns. 

592 94. i.e. on the standards are portrayed scenes illustrative 
of zeal or love, emblazed '; see I. 538. 

594. orbs, circles; cf. Pope, The Dunciad, iv. 79, 80: 
"Not closer, orb in orb, conglobed are seen 

The buzzing bees about their dusky queen." 
So in The Rape of the Lock, 283, 284 : 

"He spoke; the spirits from the sails descend. 
Some, orb in orb, around the nymph extend." 

597. in bliss; cf. vi. 892. embosomed. M. has the same allusion 
(John i. 18) in in. 169, 239, and 279. Cf. too Spenser, An Hymne of 
Heavenly Love, 134 37 : 

"Out of the bosome of eternall blisse, 
In which he reigned with his glorious syre, 
He downe descended, like a most demisse 
And abject thrall, in fleshes fraile attyre." 

598. flaming mount ; see 643. Cf. Exodus xix. 

599. Cf. III. 380, "Dark with excessive bright." Dante says of 
angels: "in their faces the eye was dazed, like a faculty which by 
excess is confounded" (Purgatorio, VIII. 35, 36). Cf. also the Paradiso, 
V. (end). 

600. progeny of light. Cf. III. 3, "God is light." 

603 608. Upon the peculiar theological bearing of this passage it 
is unnecessary to comment; we have in. 383 (note) already seen 
Milton's Arianism. Many texts of Scripture are alluded to here. Cf. 
Ps. ii. 6, 7 ("Yet have I set my King upon my holy hill of Zion.... 
Thou art my Son ; this day have I begotten thee"), Ps. ex. i ("The 
LORD said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand"), Ephes. iv. 15 
("the head, even Christ"), Gen. xxii. !i6 ("By myself have I sworn, 
saith the LORD" see also Isai. xlv. 23), Philip, ii. 10, n, Heb. i. 5. 

" Milton was very cautious what sentiments and language he 
ascribed to the Almighty, and generally confined himself to the phrases 
and expressions of Scripture " (Newton). 

322 



500 PARADISE LOST. BOOK V. 

605. anointed. 'Messiah' means 'anointed.' 

6 to. individual; in the literal sense 'not to be divided ^in- 
separable. So Adam called Eve "an individual solace dear," iv. 486. 
M. uses dividual= ' separable or separate' in vn. 382, XII. 85. 

613. blessed vision; the " beatific vision " (i. 684). 

614. titter darkness ; cf. I. 72, in. 16. 

618. solemn days, holy or festival days, Lat. solennis. 

62027. Alluding again to the music of the spheres; see 178, 
note. He compares the rhythmic movements of the angels to the 
revolutions ("wheels") of the planets and fixed stars. 

623. eccentric ; used three times by M. here and in m. 575, vm. 
'83 ; in each case there is a reference to its astronomical sense. Applied 
to the heavenly bodies eccentric signifies ' moving in an orb that deviates 
from a circle,' i.e. it connotes motion which is not strictly circular. 
Here the " mystical dance " does not describe true circles. 

624. then... when; his favourite form of emphasis; cf. 894, 895, IV. 
838, 970. So Pope, Essay on Criticism, 502, 503 : 

" Then most our trouble still when most admired, 
And still the more we give, the more required." 
Similarly we find there... where. 

627. now; not in the First Ed., inserted in the Second. 
633. Angels' food. See 407, note, rubied nectar, i.e. Homer's 
vefcrap epvOpov. rubied ' red as rubies ' ; in S. A. 543, " dancing ruby " 
is said of sparkling wine. Cf. Fitzgerald's Omar Khayyam, V. : 

"But still a Ruby kindles in the Vine." 
636 41. In the First Ed. the passage reads thus : 
" They eat, they drink, and with refection sweet 
Are fill'd, before th' all bounteous King, who shovvrd 
With copious hand, rejoycing in thir joy." 

It will be seen that the Second Ed. has three additional lines. The word 
refection (refreshment) is not used elsewhere by M. 

63 7 638. communion ; we are reminded of the doctrine of the 
'Communion of Saints.' Cf. the "fellowships of joy" in xi. 80, and 
the "sweet societies" of Lycidas, 179. Newton noted the allusion in 
638 to Ps. xxxvi. 8, 9, "thou shalt make them drink of the river of thy 
pleasures. For with thee is the fountain of life." 

642. ambrosial, fragrant ; an epithet of night in Iliad II. 57. 
exhaled; Keightley connects it with clouds, but I think that vii. 255 

shows that it belongs to night. 

643. See vi. 4 12, vn. 58486. The "high mount of God " is 
what M. in The Christian Doctrine, I. 7, calls "the highest heaven... 
as it were the supreme citadel and habitation of God " (P. W. iv. 182). 



NOTES. 501 

He cites the texts upon which he has based this conception among 
them being i Kings viii. 27 ("behold, the heaven and heaven of 
heavens cannot contain thee"), and Isaiah Ivii. 15 ("I dwell in the 
high and holy place "). 

645. night comes not there. See 162, and cf. Rev. xxi. 25, "for 
there shall be no night there." 

646, 647. dews', used, I suppose, figuratively (though some take it 
in the literal sense), as in Richard III. iv. i. 84. Cf. iv. 61416. 
See  Penseroso, 146 ("the dewy-feathered sleep"). 

tmsleeping'. "Behold, he that keepeth Israel shall neither slumber 
nor sleep," Ps. cxxi. 4. The same is said of Zeus, Iliad n. i 3. 

652. Cf. III. 357, 358 (note), xi. 79, Lycidas, 174, and the Sonnet, 
The Religious Memory, 14. We may remember Vergil's description 
(sEneid vi. 673 75) of the lives of the blessed in Elysium: 

"In groves we live, and lie on mossy beds 
By crystal streams, that murmur through the meads" (Dryden). 

653, 654. pavilions, tents = tabernacles (from Lat. tabernaculum, 
a dimin. of taberna, *a shed or hut'). Tabernaculum is used in the 
Vulgate of the tent that sheltered the Ark, whence it passed into the 
Authorised Version. Milton has the word ( = 'tent') satirically in his 
prose : "They had found a good tabernacle, they sat under a spreading 
vine, their lot was fallen in a fair inheritance " (P. W. n. 374). 

655. in their course. Is he thinking of the Temple-service, and the 
division of offices among the Levites? See iv. 561, note. 

657. alternate, sing in turns. Cf. IV. 682 84, where Adam speaks 
of the celestial voices he hears at night. 

658, 659. Satan  cf. I. 82. 

his former name what this was we are not told, because, as M. 
says in I. 361 63, the names which the apostate angels had before 
their fall were "blotted out and razed," so that there might be no 
memorial of them. Cf. vi. 373 85. 

of the Jlrst. Cf. Milton's minor treatise on divorce, The Judgment 
of Martin Bucer, " a city for learning and constancy in the true faith 
honourable among the first," P. W. III. 279. The idiom is something 
like the Gk. tv rots TrpcDrot. 

665. impaired, perhaps ' made unequal,' inferior, Lat. impar. Cf. 
VI. 691. 

671. his next subordinate, Beelzebub; see II. 299, 300, note. In 
the scene (vi.) in Marlowe's Dr Faustiis in which Lucifer and Beelzebub 
appear, the former announcing himself to Faustus says: 

"I am Lucifer, 
And this is my waw0-prince in hell"; 



502 PARADISE LOST. BOOK V. 

cf. "companion dear" in 673. No doubt, M. knew Marlowe's play; cf. 
I. 254, 255, iv. 2023 and 75 78 with Dr Faustus, in. 75 77, v. 1 19 
21. The suggestion has been made not unreasonably, I think that 
the Theatrum Poetarum (1675) of Milton's nephew Edward Phillips, in 
which short biographies and notices of the poets are given, ' ' especially 
the most eminent of all ages," reflects in some degree Milton's own 
opinions. It is significant therefore that Phillips calls Marlowe "a 
kind of a second Shakespeare," and specially mentions this tragedy: 
" of all that he hath written to the Stage his Dr Faustus hath made the 
greatest noise." The judgment pronounced on Shakespeare himself is 
plainly Miltonic, viz. that "where the polishments of Art are most 
wanting, as his Learning was not extraordinary, he pleaseth with a 
certain wild and native elegance"; cf. L 1 Allegro, 133, 134. 

673. sleep 'st thou... ? Cf. Iliad II. 60 62. 

674. and rememberest, i.e. though remembering ; cf. II. 730. 
684. the chief, i.e. chiefs (which Bentley read). 

688, 689. homeward... the North. Cf. 726, 755, 756, and the 
Argument of the book. So in Tennyson, The Last Tournament : 

"Thieves, bandits... 

Make their last head like Satan in the North." 
Bunyan follows the same tradition ; cf. The Holy War  ' ' Now upon 
Mount Diabolus, which was raised on the north side of the town 
[Mansoul], there did the tyrant [Diabolus] set up his standard " 
("Temple" ed., p. 252). 

According to some systems of demonology the four quarters of the 
world were assigned to four angels prior to the expulsion of the 
rebels from Heaven. Commonly Lucifer was made monarch of the 
north in allusion to sat. xiv. 12, 13, " How art thou fallen from 

heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning! For thou hast said in 

thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the 
stars of God : I will sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in 
the sides of the north." But the systems varied; thus Dr Ward 
in his edition of Marlowe's Faustus notes that in the old Faust- 
book it is Beelzebub who rules in the north, in Septentrione, while 
Lucifer rules in Oriente ; cf. the title " prince of the East " applied to 
him by Marlowe (Faustus, v. 104). 

The general reference to the north as the dominion of evil spirits 
might be illustrated from many sources. Greene in Friar Bacon speaks 
of a demon Asmenoth as "guider of the north" (ix. 144), and "ruler of 
the north" (xi. 109). Cf. i Henry VI. v. 3. 6. In the Appendix 
added in 1665 to Scot's Discourse on Devils there are similar references 
e.g. in chap. VIII., " Luridan is a Familiar Domestick Spirit of the 






NOTES. 503 

North, who is now become servant to Balkin, Lord and King of the 
Northern Mountains" (p. 485, Nicholson's ed.); and again in chap, ix., 
"These are the names... of Olympick Angels, governing the North, and 
ruling over every Airy Spirit that belongs unto the Northern Climate," 
p. 487. A correspondent of Notes and Queries gives similar references 
in the Old English poem "The Fall of the Angels," and Piers 
Plowman, B text, I. 118, and quotes Skelton, Colin Clout  
"Some say ye sit in trones 

Like princes aquilonis" 

Dr Cheyne remarks that there was " a mysterious sanctity attaching to 
the north," and that we have indications of this in Levit.i. u, Ezek. 
i. +,Job xxxvii. 12 (Prophecies of Isaiah, 3rd ed., I. 92). 

It has been suggested that M. intended the passage as a sneer at 
Scotland, the headquarters of Presbyterianism, to which he was bitterly 
hostile (see the note on S. A. 1461 71) ; but the notion seems fanciful. 

689 91. "He begins his revolt with a lie. So well doth Milton 
preserve the character given of him in Scripture, John viii. 44, ' he is 
a liar, and the father of it ' " (Newton). 

702. suggested, i.e. by Satan, 685 91. 

703. ambiguous -words, hints of disloyalty ; cf. &neidl. 98, 99, hinc 
spargers voces... ambiguas. For the obedience which his followers pay 
to Satan, cf. I. 331 38. 

708. Alluding to Satan's subsequent title Lucifer' day- star.' 

710. See II. 692, VI. 156, and cf. Spenser, An Hymne of Heavenly 
Love, 83, 84 : 

"The brightest Angell, even the Child of Light, 
Drew millions more against their God to fight." 

7*3> 7 J 4- " And there were seven lamps of fire burning before the 
throne," Rev. iv. 5. When M. speaks of Heaven his language, as we 
have seen, is full of reminiscences of the Revelation. 

716. Cf. the Nativity Ode, 119, "But when of old the Sons of 
Morning sung." The phrase is from Isaiah xiv. 12. 

734- lightening. I should be inclined to take it as a noun, in 
apposition to "Son" cf. 457, 458 did not the First Ed. print it 
Lightening, which implies that it was meant to be a participle (divine - 
'divinely'). Contrast VI. 642 : there it is a noun, and the First Ed. has 
Lightning', so in i. 175, II. 66. 

736, 737- Cf. u. 190, 191, note. 

739. illustrates, makes illustrious. Richardson (Diet.) cites 
Hakluyt, Voyages, i. 352, "to the illustrating of the Queenes most 
excellent Maiestie, the honour and commoditie of this her highnesse 
realme." So in Ben Jonson's fine saying: "Good men are the stars, 



504 PARADISE LOST. BOOK V. 

the planets of the ages wherein they live and illustrate the times" 
( Discoveries, LXXX v I . ). 

740. event, issue, result, Lat. eventus  a common Elizabethan 
sense. Cf. I. 624, Much Ado About Nothing, i. 2. 7, Hamlet, iv. 4. 50. 

744. an host. So the First Ed.; we should say a. Cf., however, 
Antony and Cleopatra, II. 5. 87, " An host of tongues" ; and 2 Henry VI. 
in. i. 342, "To send me packing with an host of men." 

745 47. "What an imagination the old man had! Milton beats 
everyone in the material sublime " (Tennyson). 

Wordsworth uses impearl similarly of dew in To the Daisy. 

748. regencies, dominions ; the abstract (used passively) for the 
concrete. So we find reign ' realm ' ; cf. I. 543, and Gray's Elegy, 
12, "her ancient solitary reign." 

750. in their triple degrees. Cf. Spenser, An Hymne of Heavenly 
Love, 64, 65 : 

"There they in their trinall triplicities 
About him wait, and on his will depend." 

753* 754' elongated from its form as a globe. 

Among the Schoolmen it was a vexed question, "whether some 
angels fell from each of the Orders." In the Paradiso, xxix., Dante 
only says " a part of the Angels," but in the Convivio, II. 6. 9599, "he 
had expressly declared that some, perhaps a tenth, of each Order fell " 
(note in " Temple " ed. ). 

759. See vi. 364, note. 

762 66. The main verb is called. The allusion is to Isaiah xiv. 13 
(see 688, 689, note), where the "mount of the congregation" may be 
Zion. See vn. 131. 

763. affecting, aiming at, seeking to obtain ; cf. Lat. affectare. Cf. 
in. 206, "affecting Godhead," and 2 Henry VI. iv. 7. 104, "Have I 
affected wealth or honour? Speak." 

768. pretending... commanded-, cf. perhaps S. A. 212, "pretend 
they ne'er so wise," which may mean 'pretend to be wise.' M. is 
imitating the Lat. Simula; cf. Livy xxv. 8 [Hannibal} agrum 
simulabat. 

772. In the First Ed. there is only a comma at the end of this 
line and I see no occasion to change the punctuation. Satan addresses 
the angels by their habitual titles, and then sarcastically adds that he is 
not quite sure whether they ought still to claim those titles. For the 
same brevity of phrase, in which it is easy to trace the half-expressed 
train of thought in the speaker's mind, cf. 360 62, note. Keightley 
says, "it is evident there is a break at the end" and marks the 
supposed break in his text. 



NOTES. 505 

7 8 2 88. See 606608. Todd cites Richard II. I. 4. 33, " And 
had the tribute of his supple knee." See also Hamlet, in. 2. 66, and 
cf. Gray's fragment of a tragedy, Agrippina, 99 102 : 

"Rubellius lives, 

And Sylla has his friends, though school'd by fear 
To bow the supple knee, and court the times 
With shows of fair obeisance." 

The whole drift of this passage (782 88) may be contrasted with IV. 
958 60, where Gabriel taunts Satan with his previous servility. 

789, 790. i.e. if I may be sure that I know you aright, or if you 
know yourselves to be as you are sons of Heaven. 

possessed; implying that formerly "Heaven" was equally enjoyed 
by all its inhabitants, but now has been usurped by the Almighty as His 
alone. 

793. jar not with, harmonise with ; a metaphor from music. 
Shakespeare uses the verbar= * to be discordant, out of tune ' (cf. The 
Two Gentlemen of Verona, iv. 2. 67, King Lear, iv. 7. 16), and the 
noun jar ( discord ' ; cf. As You Like It, n. 7. 5, " If he, compact of 
jars, grow musical." consist, are consistent with. Cf. Pope, Essay on 
Man, IV. 8 1, 82 : 

"But health consists with temperance alone, 

And peace, O Virtue ! peace is all thy own." 
798. Scan edict, as in S. A. 301, the only other place in M. where 
it occurs. Shakespeare has both edict (A Midsummer-Nights Dream, 
I. i. 151) and edict (i Henry IV. IV. 3. 79), the modern accentua- 
tion. 

798, 799. who without law, i.e. who, as it is, without the restraint 
of any law, avoid sin. Why, he contends, impose laws on those who 
need no law to make them walk aright? 

799. The line is a well-known crux. I think that for this=* for 
this reason, on this account' (cf.for that, 874), namely, that the angels 
are "without law." *If,' argues Satan, 'we can do right without the 
restrictions of laws, surely that is a reason why we should not have 
a law-giving lord set over us.' The clause seems added as an after- 
thought, to be having no strict construction, but depending on some 
words like 'ought he' or 'is he' which the speaker has in his mind, 
though he does not express them. We must remember that the line is 
spoken, and that M. introduces into his speeches (see 772, note) just the 
kind of verbal irregularities, the swift turns of thought and phrase, 
that belong to oratory such e.g. as we get constantly in Thucydides. 
They are frequent in S. A. where, as Coleridge happily said, the "logic 
of passion " often prevails over the "logic of grammar." 



506 PARADISE LOST. BOOK V. 

Some take for ^w = 'for this purpose': 'who can claim lordship 
for the purpose of introducing laws and edicts ? ' 

Others interpret : 'who can in reason... introduce law and edict upon 
them ?...much less for [i.e. because of] this introdviction of law and edict 
claim the right of dominion?' 

805. A bdiel, 'servant of God.' 

807. The Seraphim typified ardour, and the idea is reflected 
appropriately in the passion ("flame") of Abdiel's speech. 

809. Scan blasphemous, as in VI. 360. 

819. flatly, cf. II. 143, "flat despair." 

821. unsucceeded, having no successor, i.e. everlasting. 

822 25. " Nay but, O man, who art thou that repliest against 
God ? Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, Why hast thou 
made me thus?" Romans ix. 20, where observe the marginal reading 
" disputest with God." The thought is worked out in S. A. 307 14. 

835 41. The main reference is to Colos. i. 16, 17; see 853 64. 

his Word cf. III. 170, 383, notes. 

842 45. The argument seems to be that Christ, by becoming the 
head of the angels, became in a measure one of them, and so ennobled 
their nature. 

853 64. Contrast iv. 42, 43, where Satan admits (to himself) 
what he here denies, viz. that he and the other angels were created by 
God ; and see IX. 146, 147. In The Christian Doctrine, I. 7, M. says, 
"That the angels were created at some particular period, we have the 
testimony of Numbers xvi. 22 and xxvii. 16"; and he instances other 
texts, among them being Colos. i. 16. 

The great distinction drawn in the Paradise, xxix., between the good 
angels and the evil is that the former admitted their creation by the 
Almighty. Beatrice says to Dante (58 60) : " Those whom thou 
seest here [in Paradise] were modest to acknowledge themselves de- 
rived from that same Excellence which made them swift to so great 
understanding." 

857,858. Cf. vin. 251. 

86 1, 862. See 583, note, fatal course, the course of fate. "Our 
author [says Newton] makes Satan a sort of fatalist.... No compliment to 
fatalism to put it into the mouth of the Devil." 

864. "Thy right hand shall teach thee terrible things," Ps. xlv. 4. 

869. beseeching or besieging ; another of those jingles which M. 
uses generally to express sarcasm or contempt as here. Cf. I. 642. 
The Elizabethan writers may have adopted this literary artifice from the 
Italians; cf. Marlowe, 2 Tamburlaine, V. 3, " Hell and darkness pitch 
their pitchy tents," and Faustus (first chorus) : 



NOTES. SO 

"We must perform 
The form of Faustus' fortunes." 

872. "And I heard as it were the voice of a great multitude, 
and as the voice of many waters," Rev. xix. 6. It is, in character, 
essentially a Miltonic simile. Cf. his pamphlet Animadversions, 5 : 
"O thou the ever-begotten Light and perfect Image of the Father!... 
Thou hast sent out the spirit of prayer upon thy servants over all the 
land to this effect, and stirred up their vows as the sound of many 
waters about thy throne" (P. W. ill. 71). 

Wordsworth applies the comparison to Milton himself in the first of 
his two Sonnets on Milton ("Thou hadst a voice whose sound was like 
the sea "). 

875. flaming Seraph ; cf. 807, and see p. 681. 

87881. In the First Ed. there is no comma after crew, the 
construction being, ' I see thy fall determined, thy crew involved etc., 
and contagion spread' (i.e. three clauses dependent on I see), spread 
being a p.p. like determined and involved. Some editors place a comma 
after crew and make spread an infinitive* I see thy crew, being in- 
volved etc., spread destruction' (i.e. only two clauses dependent on 
I see). "Foul contagion spread" occurs in Lyddas, 127. 

88688. See II. 327, 328, note. In his treatise Of Reformation 
in England, n, M. writes: "let him advise how he can reject the 
pastorly rod and sheephook of Christ, and those cords of love, and not 
fear to fall under the iron sceptre of his anger, that will dash him to 
pieces like a potsherd" (P. W. II. 412). 

890. Cf. Numbers xvi. 26, " Depart, I pray you, from the tents of 
these wicked men " an appropriate allusion, as Moses is there dis- 
suading the congregation of Israel from joining Korah and his followers 
who, like Satan and his angels, were rebels. Cf. xi. 607, 608. 

devoted, doomed. Abdiel's meaning, put rather tersely, is * I do 
not fly because of your advice (871) or threats, but lest the wrath etc.* 

893. his thunder : see VI. 834 38. 

899. A favourite type of verse with M. and many other English 
poets. Cf. II. 185, in. 231. Perhaps, when he wrote this line (899) 
Milton had in mind his own position at the Restoration. The personal 
note is strong in his poetry. Cf. VI. 29 37, note. 

906, 907. retorted, flung back ; for this, the literal use, cf. Romeo 
and Juliet, in. i. 169, Troilns and Cressida, ill. 3. 101. 



508 PARADISE LOST. BOOK VI. 



BOOK VI. 

Addison evidently considered this book one of the greatest in the 
poem. He notes that our expectation has been raised by allusions to 
the struggle in books I. and II. 

i, 2. the... Angel, Abdiel. champain, plains. 

2 4. From Ovid, Metamorphoses n. 112 14: 

ecce vigil nitido fatefecit ab ortu 
purpureas Aurora fores et plena rosarum 
atria. 

Homer makes the Hours keep the gates of Olympus ; cf. Giles Fletcher, 
Death of Elizabeth : 

"The early Howres were readie to unlocke 
The doore of Morne, to let abroad the Day." 

3. with rosy hand. Cf. Jonson, Masque of Oberon, " And with her 
rosy hand puts back the stars " (said of the morn). It is suggested by 
Homer's po5o8dKTvos ijws, whence "rosy-fingered" became in poetry a 
traditional epithet of the dawn ; cf. Crashaw's pretty lines in To the 
Morning : 

" And the same rosy-finger'd hand of thine 
That shuts Night's dying eyes shall open mine." 

4 12. See V. 643, 644. The notion of light and darkness "dis- 
lodging by turns," the one going out as the other comes in, had its 
origin in Hesiod, Theogony 747, 748 (Newton). 

8. vicissitttde, alternation; cf. VII. 351. 

10. obsequious, obedient, doing its duty (cf. 783); not in the modern 
depreciatory sense, 'servile.' 

u, 12. i.e. what is thought darkness in Heaven (where there is no 
night, v. 645) would seem twilight on earth. 

19. in procinct, ready. "The Roman soldiers were said to stand 
in procinctu, when ready to give the onset " (Hume) ; from the noun 
procinctus, 'a being prepared for battle.* Cf. the p.p. procinctus, 
'prepared' literally 'girded up,' from procingere, 'to gird or tuck up 
the dress.' M. uses succinct in that sense, ill. 643. 

2937. Servant of God see V. 805. Texts glanced at are : Mat. 
xxv. 21 ; i Tim. vi. 12 ; 2 Tim. iv. 7, " I have fought a good fight " ; 
Ps. Ixix. 7, " for thy sake I have borne reproach " ; and 2 Tim. 
ii. 15. 

Is Milton here thinking of himself? He too had sacrificed all to 



NOTES. 509 

" the testimony of truth " (as he judged), and borne reproach for his 
allegiance to the cause of republicanism when the "revolted multitudes" 
went back to the old order of things and acclaimed the Restoration. 
There is a constant play of personal and contemporary allusion in his 
poems. See 462, xi. 54246, 632 36, 808 18, and S. A. 697 
700, 1457 72 (with the notes); and compare Dante's allusions to 
his treatment by Florence, and her corruptions, e.g. in the Paradiso, 
xxxi. 3739. 

34. " Evill deedes may better then bad words be bore," The Faerie 
Queen e, iv. 4. 4. 

42. right reason ; cf. xn. 84. M seems to use the phrase = ' con- 
science'; cf. The Christian Doctrine, I. 2, " that feeling, whether we 
term it conscience or right reason" (P. W. iv. 15). Pope has it in 
a different sense = ' the reasoning faculty'; cf. the Essay on Criticism, 
211, 212 : 

"If once right reason drives that cloud away, 
Truth breaks upon us with resistless day"; 

where the "cloud" is the pride that obscures our judgment. It was 
a term of the Stoics, reproduced in the Schoolmen's phrase recta ratio. 
See Selden's Table-Talk, cxxi. ("Reason"). 

44 55. Revelation xii. 7 9. 

44. Michael, 'who is like unto God?'; being an archangel he is 
chosen to fulfil high office. In The Christian Doctrine, I. 9, M. writes : 
" There appears to be one who presides over the rest of the good angels, 
to whom the name of Michael is often given... Michael, the leader of the 
angels, is introduced (Rev. xii.)- in the capacity of a hostile commander 
waging war with the prince of the devils, the armies on both sides 
being drawn out in battle array" (cf. 105 107). prince; cf. Dan. xii. i, 
"Michael... the great prince." 

45, 46. Gabriel; cf. iv. 549, note. He is inferior to Michael 
("next," 45) because only an angel. Hey wood (Hierarchic, 1635) 
draws the same distinction. 

52. from God and bliss; cf. III. 61, 62. 

53 55- Hell has already been created. Tartanis; cf. II. 69, 
note, 858. 

56 59- A reminiscence of Exodus xix. 16, 18. 

57, 58. to roll, i.e. smoke began to roll flames in wreaths. 
Keightley takes roll ' enroll, enwrap.' reluctant, struggling, forcing 
their way through the smoke ; a Latinism ; luctantes Jlamma occurs in 
Silius Italicus. Newton took reluctant in the opposite sense, ' slow and 
unwilling to break forth,' but the word has its Latin notion ('struggling ') 
in Milton, except in iv. 311. 



510 PARADISE LOST. BOOK VI. 

59, 60. the... trumpet. Cf. XI. 73 76, where the angels are sum- 
moned by a trumpet which M. suggests may be the one afterwards 
heard on Mount Horeb (Exod. xix. 1619) : 

*' When God descended, and perhaps once more 
To sound at general doom." 

gan blow, i.e. began; Shakespeare also omits to cf. Coriolanus, 11. 
2. 119, " the din of war gan pierce." Probably the omission was partly 
due to the old use of gan, the pret. of ginnen, as an auxiliary verb = 
' did.' Thus in Spenser " gan blow " might mean 'did blow ' ; and M. 
may have revived the idiom, as some think. But wherever he uses^aw, 
'beginning' is implied ; cf. IX. 1016, x. 710, P. R. IV. 410. 

62. stood for, fought for; cf. Coriolanus, II. 2. 45, IV. 6. 45. 

63 68. Cf. the very similar scene in I. 549 62 ; there (as in Of 
Education) M. dwells on the influence of music. 

in silence. "Homer thus marches his Grecians silent and sedate, 
Iliad ill. 8"(Todd). 

69. obvious, lying in their way Lat. obvius ; cf. xi. 374. 

73 76. A simile that would appeal to Adam. " And Adam 
gave names to all cattle, and to the fowl of the air, and to every beast 
of the field," Gen. ii. 20. See vn. 493. 

Milton's angels glide through the air like the classical gods (Newton). 

79. to the North. See v. 688, 689, note. M. clearly places the con- 
flict in some part of Heaven ; but this was a point much disputed among 
theologians. Cf. Reginald Scot, Discourse on Devils ( 1 584) : ' ' Now 
where this battell was fought... there is great contention. The Thomists 
say. ..in the empyrean heaven, where the abode is of blessed spirits.... 
Augustine and manie others saie...in the highest region of aier; others 
saie, in the firmament ; others in paradise," p. 423. 

81 85. i.e. and at nearer view there bristled the banded powers. 
bristled ; this seems to be the main verb ; it conveys the same impres- 
sion as Lat. horrere, Gk. <f>pLo-ffiv ; cf. "horrent arms," II. 513. Many 
editors take bristled as a p.p., supplying appeared from 79 as the main 
verb to go with powers in 85 an awkward ellipse surely. beams t 
shafts of the spears, various, varied, made diverse. 

Hey wood (Hierarchic, p. 341) says of the combat : 

"No Lances, Swords, nor Bombards they had then, 
Or other weapons now in use with men ; 
None of the least materiall substance made, 
Spirits by such giue no offence or aid, 
Onely spiritual Armes to them were lent." 

Milton's description is throughout material and realistic. His battle is 
a Homeric fray, slightly idealised. Editors refer also to many passages 



( 



NOTES. 5 1 1 

in Ariosto and Tasso and Spenser (especially) which show what models 
Milton had in his mind when he pictured the single combats between 
the warrior angels. 

84. argument, designs, subjects ; a Latinism. Cf. the Epitaphium 
Damonis, 184, gemino calaverat argumento (said of an artist working 
designs on a goblet). Cf. too Milton's Lat. use of argument^ ' subject- 
matter of a poem,' I. 24, ix. 13. 

93. hosting, encounter, wont, are wont ; but it may be a preterite, 
as in i. 764. 

101,102. idol, image, flaming Cherubim ; M. always invests the 
Cherubim with brilliance, following Ezekiel (chap, i. especially verses 
13, 14). In iv. 797 they are "radiant files"; in the Nativity Ode, 
114, "glittering ranks." 

105. interval, the space between two armies; TO fteTalxjuov. 

107, 108. cloudy van, i.e. the van-guard (Fr. avant-garde) dense as 
a cloud, edge, Lat. acies, the front line of a fight ; cf. I. 276. 

1 14. Newton notes that such soliloquies (or thinkings aloud) are 
common in epic poets, e.g. in Homer. Like speeches and dialogues 
they serve, somewhat artificially, to vary the narrative which, cast in 
one continuous form, would become monotonous. Somewhat similar is 
Shakespeare's use of interruptions and questions to vivify a lengthy piece 
of narrative, e.g. in The Tempest, I. 2, where Miranda breaks in on the 
long story in which Prospero unfolds their history, and in Coriolanus, 
I. i, in Menenius's "fable." See xn. 270, note. 

115. realty, reality; the form occurs in Henry More's Life of the 
Soul, ii. 12. Some editors explain realty' loyalty,' i.e. as used in the 
sense of Ital. realta, loyalty,' reale, ' loyal.' But there is no evidence 
that the word ever bore this meaning, and surely the ordinary sense 
suffices : since what Abdiel deplores is that Satan retains the outward 
semblance of greatness after the inward reality has gone from him. An 
obvious correction sfealty. 

116. Cf. the sentiment in iv. 856, "wicked and thence weak." 
120, 121. Referring to the last scene in bk. v. (809 et seq.). 
tried, i.e. tried, or tested, and found unsound. 

124. Scan contest, as always in M. ; cf. iv. 872, S. A. 461, 
865. 

129. prevention, coming before; the lit. sense of Lat. pra- 
venire. 

130. securely, without anxiety, boldly Lat. secure. 

143. there be who, i.e. some who. Morris says : " The root be was 
conjugated in the present tense, singular and plural, as late as Milton's 
time." This phrase there be was common ; cf. Comtts, 519. 



512 PARADISE LOST. BOOK VI. 

M7, 148. sect, followers (Lat. seqtii] ; in modern E. depreciatory. 
Language tends to deteriorate in sense ; few English words have risen 
in meaning. M. may have brought in the word ironically, " in order 
to sneer at the Loyalists of his time, who branded all Dissenters, of 
whom he was one, with the opprobrious name of Sectaries" (Thyer). 

151. sought for, i.e. by Satan ; it qualifies tkou. 

156. See v. 710, note, synod; specially used by Shakespeare of an 
assembly of the gods; cf. Coriolanus, v. 2. 74, "The glorious gods sit 
in hourly synod about thy particular prosperity." So M. in II. 391, 
XI. 67. 

161. success, fortune ; here ' ill-fortune.' 

162, 163. this pause, i.e. let there be. Satan will pause a moment 
to reply to Abdiel's speech, lest the latter should boast that his 
arguments have been unanswered. 

165, 1 66. M. is glancing at one of his favourite maxims, that too 
many men had rather purchase ease at the expense of slavery than 
liberty at the cost of effort. Cf. S. A. 26871, and contrast n. 

25557- 

167 69. ministering... minstrelsy. A contemptuous jingle, as in 
v. 869 (note) ; both words are from Lat. minister. There is a reference 
to Hebrews i. 14, "Are they not all ministering spirits?" 

minstrelsy, minstrels ; servility, slaves ; freedom, free men. The 
use of the abstract for the concrete (active or passive) is common in 
M., as in Shakespeare, as we have seen. 

*74 r 75' i.e. unjustly do you depreciate (" depravest ") service to 
God's Son by calling it servitude. For deprave= t detract, depreciate,' 
cf. Much Ado About Nothing, v. i. 95, "flout (i.e. jeer), deprave and 
slander," and Troilus and Cressida, v. 2. 132, where depravation = 
'detraction.' 

181. Editors compare Horace, Satires n. vii. 8082. The thought 
is expanded in P. R. n. 466 72. See note on Sonnet xn. n, 12. 

182. lewdly, basely. 

183. 184. Cf. Satan's words in I. 263 ; see the note there. 
thy kingdom, i.e. in the future. 

195. his... spear; taller than a vessel-mast (i. 292). 

19598- These similes occur in I. 230, 231 and S. A. 1647, 1648. 
The idea that earthquakes were due to the escape of winds pent up 
underground comes in Dante (Purgatorio, XXI. 55, 56). 

207. In the description that follows editors find echoes of Hesiod's 
account of the strife between the Titans and Zeus. M. evidently admired 
the Theogony y cf. 4 12, note, and Lycidas, 15, 1 6 (modelled on the 
commencement of the Theogony). 



NOTES. 513 

212, 213. the dismal hiss of... darts  the use of the abstract form 
of phrase lends a touch of vagueness which increases the horror 
of the scene. 

215. cope cf. IV. 992. 

216. battles, armies; a common use in Milton and Shakespeare; cf. 
Richard III. v. 3. 88, "Prepare thy battle early in the morning." 

219. centre ; sometimes used alone to signify the middle point of 
the earth ; cf. i. 686, Comus, 382. 

222. i.e. the four elements; see n. 274, 275, note. 

225. combustion, confusion, turmoil. 

229 36. " Each legion was in number like an army, each single 
warriour was in strength like a legion, and, though led in fight, was 
as expert as a commander in chief. So that the Angels are celebrated 
first for their number, then for their strength, and lastly for their 
expertness in war" (Newton). 

229. numbered such, so numerous; cf. VIII. 19. 

236. ridges, i.e. the ranks of troops; the metaphor, perhaps, of 
furrows in a ploughed field. Cf. Shakespeare, Lucrece, 1439. 

239. moment, the impulse that should turn the scale (cf. 245) on 
the side of victory ; Lat. momentum. Cf. X. 45 47 (a close parallel), 
and The Christian Doctrine, I. 10, "the balance of earthly happiness 
or misery," where the original has tantum vita momentum vel beatce 
vel misercs. 

248. no equal he had been foiled temporarily by Abdiel, but the 
combat between them was broken off (Newton). 

249. For the order of the words cf. v. 5, note. 

250 53. For the sword of Michael (mentioned neither in Revelation 
nor in Daniel], see II. 294, 295, and xi. 247, 248, where it is called 
"Satan's dire dread." Cf. the sword of yneas and King Arthur's 
mystic Excalibur in the Idylls of the King. Supernatural equipment of 
the hero is an epic convention. 

two-handed, i.e. wielded with both hands because of its size and 
weight ; cf. 2 Henry VI. II. i. 46, " Come with thy two-hand sword." 

This passage gave rise to the notion that the "two-handed engine " 
of Lycidas, 130, meant Michael's sword, where the allusion, probably, 
is to either " the axe laid unto the root of the trees " (Matthew iii. 10, 
Luke iii. 9) or the sword of justice. 

255. his... shield; vast as the moon's orb (i. 287). tenfold, with 
ten layers; cf. "seven-times-folded shield," i.e. septemplex, S. A. 
1122. 

2 75> 276. evil... thy offspring. Cf. the famous allegory of Sin and 
Death, n. 648 et seq. 

p - L. 33 



514 PARADISE LOST. BOOK VI. 

277. broils; cf. II. 837. 

282. Adversary, Satan ; see v. 658, 659, note. 

285 87. i.e. even if they have fallen, yet they have risen 
again. ' Have you,' says Satan, ' been so successful in putting these 
to flight, that you should hope to deal ("transact") easily with 
me?' 

288. err not that, do not foolishly think that. 

289. evil; we might have expected hateful (264); but Abdiel 
implied (262) that the strife was part of the evil due to Satan. 

291 93. Cf. 183, I. 255. to dwell, i.e. "we mean" to dwell. 
296. Shakespeare and M. have bothar0 and parley. 
306, 307. Cf. Henry V. II. Prologue, 8: 

"For now sits Expectation in the air 
And hides a sword, from hilts unto the point, 
With crowns imperial, crowns and coronets"; 

and Troilus and Crcssida, Prologue, 20 22. Cf. the personification of 
Horror in iv. 989, and see II. 666, note. The Faerie Qtteene gave 
a lasting vogue to personification. 

309. "within the wind; the phrase recalls Hamlet, n. 2. 495. 
310 15. i.e. such commotion as there would be, if, nature's 
concord having been broken, war should arise among the constellations, 
and two planets should combat. Cf. II. 533 38, 714 20. 
311. great things by small; see II. 921, 922, note. 
313,314. aspect; in Elizabethan E. often used as an astrological 
term signifying the position of a planet in the sky, and its " influence," 
which was favourable or " malign " according to its position. Cf. 
Troilus and Crtssida, I. 3. 89 92 : 

"And therefore is the glorious planet Sol 
In noble eminence enthroned and sphered 
Amidst the other [i.e. planets] ; whose medicinable eye 
Corrects the ill aspects of planets evil." 
M. mentions the five main " aspects," x. 657 61. 

When two planets are distant from each other by half the circle, 
i.e. are in diametrically opposite parts of the heavens, they are said, in 
astrological language, to be "in opposition." And it is "a malign 
aspect," because the rays of the two bodies collide and strive for 
mastery, shedding a " noxious efficacy " (x. 660) on the earth. The 
Elizabethans often refer to this notion ; cf. Dr Faustus, VI. 65, " why 
have we not... oppositions, eclipses all at one time?" Dr Ward in his 
edition of Dr Faustus, p. 172, also refers to Marlowe's 2 Tamburlaine, 
III. 5, and to Greene's fames IV. I. i. See pp. 691, 692. 
318. determine, make an end of the matter ; cf. II. 330. 



NOTES. 515 

repeat, repetition ; cf. its substantival use as a term in music. 

320 23. Cf. Spenser's description of Artegall's sword, The 
Faerie Queene, v. i. 10. the armoury  "The Lord hath opened his 
armoury," Jeremiah 1. 25. Cf. VII. 200, and Tennyson's lines on 
Milton : 

"Gabriel, Abdiel, 
Starr'd from Jehovah's gorgeous armories." 

323 27. "Michael's sword with the down-stroke cut that of Satan 
in two, and then with an up-stroke (coup de revers) it 'shared' his side" 
(Keightley). 

shared, cut, laid open ; used by Spenser, e.g. in The Faerie 
Queene, iv. 2. 17, V. 5. 9. Cf. shear, share (a portion), plough-share, 
all from the root skar, seen in Gk. Kelpetv, Lat. secare. 

327. first knew pain. See 362, 394, 431, 432. Only the rebellious 
angels are sensible of physical pain ; and the reason is given in 691 
"sin hath impaired." Through sin they have made gross (cf. 66 1) the 
pure " essence" of their original forms ; and spirit has deteriorated into 
matter (cf. v. 478, note), rendering them vulnerable. The obedient 
angels are invulnerable because innocent (400 403). 

Johnson's criticism, however, seems just : " The confusion of spirit 
and matter, which pervades the whole narration of the war of heaven, 
fills it with incongruity." 

329. griding, piercing, cutting through. " Discontinuous wound is 
said in allusion to the old definition of a wound, that it separates the 
continuity of the parts" (Newton). In surgical language, vulnus est 
sohitio continui. Bacon uses discontinuation in the medical sense, 
'solution of continuity,' in a list of diseases (The Advancement of 
Learning, II. 10. 5). Cf. also his Essay Of Unity in Religion'. u as 
in the natural body a wound or solution of continuity is worse than 
a corrupt humour, so in the spiritual." 

33> 33i Happily imitated in The Rape of the Lock, in. 151, 152 : 
" Fate urg'd the shears, and cut the Sylph in twain 

(But airy substance soon unites again)." 

Cf. too Wordsworth, Laodamia, "The Phantom parts, but parts to 
reunite." Todd quotes from Burton's Anatomy to the effect that 
" devils... feele paine if they be hurt that, if their bodies be cut, with 
admirable celerity they come together againe ; that, in their fall, 
their bodies were changed into a more...grosse substance [cf. 661]." 
M. has worked in all three ideas ; he may have owed them to the 
Anatomy (with which he was certainly acquainted see Introduction to 
LAllegro). 

332. nectarous, divine, heavenly. Bentley with misdirected in- 

332 



5l6 PARADISE LOST. BOOK VI. 



genuity proposed ichorous, from Gk. ixup, Homer's name (cf. The 
Dunciad, ill. 92) for the fluid that issued from the gods when 
wounded ; cf. Iliad v. 340, djjiftpoTov alua, Oeoio,  ix&Pt '6s ""^P T P^ i 
[AaKdpeacn Oeolffi. 

335. was run, i.e. Lat. cursum est; cf. x. 229. The whole 
picture of the wounded chief being rescued by his friends and borne 
from the field to his chariot is Homeric (e.g. Iliad xiv. 428 32). 

339. files, ranks ; cf. I. 567, "the armed files." 

348, 349. liquid texture, i.e. the "essence" of which he speaks 
in I. 424, 425 " soft and uncompounded." 

no more than can the fluid air. A favourite poetic comparison ; 
cf. Hamlet, i. i. 143 46, referring to the Ghost, at which the 
watchmen have struck with their halberds: 

" We do it wrong, being so majestical, 
To offer it the show of violence ; 
For it is, as the air, invulnerable, 
And our vain blows malicious mockery." 

Macbeth, deeming himself invulnerable, says to Macduff (v. 8. 
9, 10) : 

"As easy mayst thou the intrenchant air 

With thy keen sword impress as make me bleed"; 
where intrenchant =' not to be cut' (Fr. trencher, 'to cut'), the whole 
phrase being a variation on Hamlet, IV. i. 44, "the woundless 
air" (i.e. that cannot be wounded). There is the same idea in 
The Tempest, in. 3. 6163. Sir Thomas Browne writes: "The 
ghosts are afraid of swords in Homer ; yet Sibylla tells ^Eneas in 
Virgil, the thin habit of spirits was beyond the force of weapons " (Urn 
Burial, IV.). 

35 ! 53- Cf. I. 428, 429, n. 948, notes. 

354 85. With regard to some of the names here and later we 
have seen (i. 36175) that M. adopted the mediaeval notion that the 
deities of heathenism, oriental and classical, were the apostate angels. 
He could not describe their rebellion without giving them some titles : 
this belief (based upon texts such as Levit. xvii. 7, i Cor. x. 20) supplied 
him with suitable names. 

355. the might of Gabriel, the mighty Gabriel ; exactly the Homeric 
use of SIT;, as in 'the might of Hercules,' or 'the Herculean might,' for 
' the mighty Hercules.' Cf. the use of the abstract in Latin, as in 
Horace's mitis sapientia L<zli (' the wisdom of Lselius ' = the wise Lselius), 
or prisci Catonis... virtus. Cf. Dryden, ALn. vi. 942, "the filial duty 
thus replies," i.e. the dutiful son. See 371, 372, vi. 722, vn. 175. 

357. Moloch illustrates his character in his speech in n. 51 105 : 



NOTES. 5I 

his "ferocious character," says Johnson, "appears, both in the battle 
and the council, with exact consistency." Cf. I. 392, 393. 

359. 360. Alluding to 2 Kings xix. 22. Scan blasphemous. 

362. uncouth, strange. 

363. Uriel. See in. 648, 649, note. Raphael can speak of his 
own exploits thus because his name was not known to Adam 
(Bentley). 

364. See note on 831 41. Some editors interpret diamond^ 
'adamant' (cf. no, 255); the words, etymologically identical, were 
sometimes treated as synonymous. But we hear of " diamond quarries," 
V. 759, and of "diamond rocks," Comus, 88 1, where diamond must 
bear its common sense : perhaps it does here : applied to angelic beings 
the description would not be extravagant. 

365. Adramelech, * magnificence of the king' ; a deity whose worship 
was brought to Samaria by the colonists from Sepharvaim (2 Kings 
xvii. 31). He represented an aspect of the Sun-god. 

Asmadai; see IV. 168, where M. uses the form Asmodeus, now 
generally employed (and perhaps most familiar through Le Sage's work, 
Le Diable Boiteux}. Editors refer to the account of Asmodeus in 
the Book of Tobit v. (see 221 23). 

In the systems of demonology popular in the i6th and iyth centuries 
Asmodeus held very high rank, and was a type of might; cf. "potent," 
366. Thus Heywood (Hierarchic, 1635) says that the fallen angels, 
like the faithful angels, were divided into nine Orders, and that 
Asmodeus was head of the fourth Order (p. 436). Reginald Scot 
(Discoverie of Witchcraft, 1584) speaks of " Sidonay, alias Asmoday, 
a great king, strong and mightie" (Nicholson's ed., p. 321); and in 
the Faust-book (1594), second part, we read of " Asmody a king mighty 
and puissant" (Thorns' English Prose Romances, 1858, in. 319). 
There can be no doubt that Milton was deeply versed in these mediaeval 
traditions ; and this particular tradition as to the might and prowess of 
Asmodeus lends, I think, significance to the present passage. 

Compare Dante's use of non-biblical tradition, as where he places 
among the denizens of his Inferno "that caitiff choir of the angels, who 
were not rebellious, nor were faithful to God ; but were for themselves " 
(ill. 3739). " There is " (says the note in the " Temple " edition of 
the Inferno, p. 34) "no mention of these angels in the Bible. Dante 
evidently followed a popular tradition, traces of which may be found in 
the medieval Voyage of St Brandan" (celebrated in Matthew Arnold's 
poem). 

368. plate, armour made of solid pieces of metal ; mail, a sort of 
chain work. 



518 PARADISE LOST. BOOK VI. 

371. Ariel, 'lion of God'; cf. Isaiah xxix. i (margin), where 
Ariel seems to be a title of Jerusalem ; it is the name of one of the 
"chief men" whom Ezra summoned (Ezra viii. 16). Probably M. 
has used the name merely because its meaning is so descriptive of a 
great warrior. 

Arioch, 'lion-like'; cf. Gen. xiv. i, Dan. ii. 14 (where Nebuchad- 
nezzar's " captain of the king's guard " is so called). That the name was 
applied, possibly in Rabbinical writings, to some evil spirit, seems 
proved by Nash's Pierce Pennilesse, "great Arioch, that is termed the 
spirit of revenge " (Keightley, Life of Milton, p. 472). 

372. Ramiel, 'exaltation of God'; whence M. took the name 
(or whether he coined it) is not known. "Milton's proper names 
are often chosen for their full sounds" (Tennyson). 

373.  might relate. A skilful way of closing this particular 
account. 

374. eternize, make eternal in fame, immortalise ; rather a favourite 
word with the Elizabethans. Cf. 2 Henry VI. v. 3. 29 31 : 

" Now, by my faith, lords, 'twas a glorious day : 
Saint Alban's battle won by famous York 
Shall be eternized in all age to come." 
So in The Faerie Queene, i. 10. 59, and The Teares of the Muses, 582. 

374, 375. elect Angels ; cf. in. 136, note. True fame is of Heaven 
alone (Lycidas, 78 84). 

379,. 380. See I. 36175, v. 658, 659, notes. 

387. deformed, hideous, Lat. deformis. 

390. charioter ; for the form cf. " pioner " (i. 676). 

391 96. what stood-, unlike that which "lay overturned," 390. 
The sense is ' such part of the army as had not been laid low, now 
either retreated, all along the line of the Satanic host (which scarce offered 
any resistance), or fled in utter disorder.' Orderly retreat and panic- 
stricken flight are contrasted. 

399. cubic, four-square ; not an exact use of the word, but editors 
compare Milton's Reason of Church Government, "as those smaller 
squares in battle unite in one great cube, the main phalanx." Masson 
takes cubic literally, arguing that as the angels are not subject 
to the law of gravitation they can form a cube or any other solid 
figure. 

404. unobnoxious, not liable ; a Latinism. 

405. though... moved. "This circumstance is judiciously added 
to prepare the reader for what happens in the next fight" (Newton). 

407. inducing, bringing on ; exactly Horace's jam nox inducere 
tcrris  umbras .. .parabat (Satires i. 5. 9, 10). 



NOTES. 519 

410. the foughten field  an old ballad-phrase. It occurs in 
Henry V. iv. 6. 18, 19 : 

"As in this glorious and well-foughten field 

We kept together in our chivalry ! " 

It is one of the old-world phrases revived by Tennyson; cf. The 
Coming of Arthur : 

"Then quickly from the foughten field he sent 
Ulfius and Brastias and Bedivere 
His new-made knights to King Leodogran"; 

The Holy Grail, and The Princess, v. -287. He uses foughten also 
simply as a poetic variant form= fought : 

'* And ever since the lords 
Have foughten like wild beasts among themselves," 

The Coming of Arthur. 

413. Cherubic... fires , i.e. the "flaming Cherubim," 102, to whom, 
throughout P. L., falls the duty of sentinels. 

Cf. the description of the sword "which turned every way" 
(Genesis iii. 24) in xn. 592, 593, 643. 

415. i.e. far removed into the dark, dislodged', cf. V. 669. 

421. too mean pretence, too mean ambition: they aimed at some- 
thing better than mere liberty. Shakespeare uses pretence^-' design, 
ambition'; cf. Coriolanus, I. 2. 20. So M. in u. 825. affect ; see 
v. 763. 

429. of future ; cf. phrases like 'of late,' * of old.' 

447. Nisroch ; the Assyrian deity in whose temple Sennacherib 
was murdered by his sons, 2 Kings xix. 37, Isaiah xxxvii. 38. Reginald 
Scot says (Discourse on Devils, p. 435), "Nisroch signifieth a delicate 
tentation"; but probably it means 'great eagle.' 

455. i.e. against those who cannot be pained (cf. 404, 405) or suffer. 
Cf. Dryden, speaking of the ghosts in Hades, " Forms without bodies 
and impassive air," ^Zn. vi. 409. 

458. remiss; used in the literal sense of Lat. remissus, 'slack, 
relaxed, languid.' 

462 64. A sentiment " suitable enough to a deity of the effeminate 
Assyrians " (Newton). 

In the reference to "pain" there may be a personal glance; see 
xi. 542-46. 

465. offend =. ;Lat. offendere, 'to strike, hit.' 

467, 468. to me deserves ; i.e. in my opinion he deserves no less 
gratitude than we owe to Satan for our deliverance. Cf. to in phrases 
like 'to my thinking,' 'to my knowledge,' 'to my mind,' all found in 
Shakespeare. 



520 PARADISE LOST. BOOK VI. 

470. Editors show that the notion that cannon were invented in 
Hell is found in Ariosto's Orlando Furioso, ix. 28, The Faerie Quetnc, 
I. 7. 13, and Drayton's Polyolbion, 18. 

478. crude, in their raw (Lat. crudus], un wrought state ; cf. 511. 

479. spiritous ; so the original editions ; there seems no need to 
change it to ' spiritm^us.' The materials, he says, "contain spirituous 
and fiery particles (cf. 483) which, if they be melted, will foam up 
out of them " (Keightley). 

481. ambient light. Cf. VI I. 89, and Shelley's Alastor: 

"every sight 

And sound from the vast earth and ambient air 
Sent to his heart the choicest impulses." 

482. nativity, native state (or place), the deep, the under- 
ground. 

495. i.e. to be despaired of, exactly Lat. desperandus ; cf. I. 
660. So Macbeth, v. 8. 13, "despair thy charm." 

496. cheer, spirits ; generally high spirits, joy, but not always ; cf. 
Shakespeare, Sonnet 97, 13, "so dull a cheer," and Marlowe's Faustus, 
xin. 61, "I go, sweet Faustus, but with heavy cheer." Properly cheer 
means face, from O. Fr. ofo'<fr?=Late Lat. cara, 'face' ( = Gk. ndpa, 
* head ' ?) ; and some editors think that it has that sense here. 

498. and each, i.e. " admired " = ' wondered.' 

501 506. thy race, Adam's. Probably M. is thinking of the Civil 
War. Descriptions of civil strife and its incidents must have appealed 
with the force of personal experience to many of his readers. The same 
thing is felt in reading Bunyan's Holy War. 

502. in future days. "This speaking in the spirit of prophecy 
adds great dignity to poetry" (Newton). He compares jEneid IV. 
625, and adds : " this, here, very properly comes from the mouth of an 
Angel." 

507509. The abrupt style is "admirably contrived to express 
the hurry of the Angels " (Newton). 

512. Cf. " nitrous powder " in iv. 815. 

513. found; surely the preterite of find; but it has been taken as 
found ' to melt or cast metals.' That scarcely suits "foam"; moreover, 
founded (cf. I. 703) would be required. 

514. concocted and adusted, baked and dried. 

518, 519. engines, i.e. cannon. When cannon were first used, the 
balls were made of stone, not iron; cf. the allusion to "gunstones" in 
Henry V. I. 2. 282, with the passage from Caxton's Chronicles quoted 
by Steevens "[he] lette make...grete gonne stones for the Dolphynne 
to play wyth all." It should be remembered that gun originally meant 



NOTES. 521 

a sort of catapult for throwing stones. Cf. Selden's Table- Talk, LXXVI. : 
"The Word Gun was in use in England for an Engine, to cast a thing 
from a Man, long before there was any Gun-powder found out." 
incentive reed, i.e. the gunner's match, incentive, enkindling. 

520. pernicious... to fire, so full of destruction as to kindle viz. the 
powder. Newton takes pernicious =!*&. pernix, 'quick'; but could 
the word bear this meaning? M. elsewhere (cf. 849) always uses 
it =' fraught with destruction' (Lat. perniciuni). 

521. See v. 139. conscious, i. e. that witnessed what they did ; Hume 
aptly cites Ovid, Metamorphoses xm. 15, quorum nox conscia sola cst. 

528, 529. dawning hills ; "great Rarities, " said Bentley, and read 
"downs and hills." Many of his proposals justified Pope's sneer at 
" Thy [i.e. of Dulness] mighty Scholiast, whose unwearied pains 

Made Horace dull, and humbled Milton's strains." 
See Tennyson, CEnone : 

" I waited underneath the dawning hills, 
Aloft the mountain lawn was dewy- dark, 
And dewy-dark aloft the mountain pine." 

535. i.e. the swiftest-winged Cherub. Zophiel, 'spy of God. J M. 
seems to have invented the name appropriately, since the Cherub is 
one of the scouts sent out (529). 

539. so thick a cloud. Cf. "cloud... of war" in the Sonnet to 
Cromwell, where editors quote Vergil's phrase nubes belli JEneid X. 809. 

541. sad, steadfast, sectire, without fear. 

542. Cf. Horace's Martem tttnica tecttim adamantina, Od. I. 6. 13. 

543. 544. gripe i cf. iv. 408, XI. 264. orbed, circular; cf. 254. 
The shields were held either straight out from the body, or high to 
protect the head (Masson). 

546. barbed with fire, i.e. arrows with fire at their points; cf. 
Shelley, Adonais, 99, "And dull the barbed fire against his frozen cheek," 
i.e. piercing. Cotgrave explains fieche barbette by " a bearded or barbed 
arrow." A barb is a hook or jag on an arrow-head. 

547 49. Most modern texts have a semicolon after themselves 
and a comma after impediment reversing the original punctuation. 

impediment-, cf. Lat. impedimenta, 'the carriages and baggage of 
an army.' The good angels are not encumbered, like their enemy, with 
artillery. 

took alarm, sprang to arms ; this was a current phrase ; cf. 
Bunyan, The Holy War : "Now, Diabolus and his men being expertly 
accustomed to night-work, took the alarm presently [at once], and were 
as ready to give them battle as if they had sent them word of their 
coming" ("Temple" ed., p. 267). 



522 PARADISE LOST. BOOK VI. 

550. move; there is no authority for moved  but it is tempting, all 
the verbs being in the past tense. 

553. Cf. Henry V. ill. Prologue, 33, "the devilish cannon." 
training, dragging, Fr. trainer. 

558 67. The irony and verbal quibbles "discharge," "touch," 
etc. are too obvious to need comment. This scene of the introduction 
of artillery can scarce be reckoned among the great achievements in 
Paradise Lost. Humour is not Milton's forte: and are there not signs 
in what follows of some want of care? e.g. in the involved lines 571 
78, and in 579 81, where stood occurs three times. 

Addison considered this part " the most exceptionable in the whole 
poem " (i.e. open to exception), on account of these quibbles. 

560. composure^" composition" in 613, i.e. agreement, settlement. 

571 78. The sense appears to be: 'We saw a row of brazen or 
iron pillars at least things which but for their hollow mouths we should 
have supposed to be pillars (for they were very like them).' 

576. iron. ..mould. M. may have recollected the description of 
Sir Artegall's page, " His name was Talus, made of yron mould" (The 
Faerie Queene, v. i. 12). mould, substance. 

578. hollow, i.e. deceitful, as applied to "truce"; but there is a 
quibbling reference to the hollow barrels of the guns. 

580. stood, i.e. a "reed" stood. Some think that M. dictated 
held, or some such verb, to which Seraph would be the subject. 
suspense, in suspense, Lat. suspensi. 

581. amused, musing, wondering (cf. 623) ; the original sense cf. 
Cotgrave, " to amuse, make to muse or think of, to gaze at." Fr. amuser 
is a compound of a and O. Fr. muser, 'to gaze at, muse over.' 

582. at once, simultaneously. It seems best to make all the 
subject to put, and to mark this by placing at once within commas : 
' all did it, and did it simultaneously.' Some editors take all at once 
as a single adverbial phrase ; but this is repetition after sudden, and 
leaves put without a subject. 

584. nicest, most exact, accurate. 

586. Newton compares Othello, in. 3. 355, 356. 

587. embowelled, filled. 

589. glut, i.e. the ammunition wherewith they were charged. 
595 97 Cf. 65661. M. attributes to spiritual beings the power 
of reducing or expanding ("dilating," I. 429) themselves at will. Cf. 

35153. an <* I- 789. 79- 

598. dissipation, scattering, flight; cf. Lat. dissipare, 'to rout, put 
to flight.' 

599. serried', cf. I. 548. 



NOTES. 



523 



601. indecent, disgraceful; cf. decent= ' graceful, comely,' Lat. 
decens, ill. 644, and  Penseroso, 36. 

605. displode, let off, fire, tire, rank, row ; cf. The Hind and the 
Panther, III. 316 19: 

" Constrained to quit his cause, no succour found, 
The foe discharges every tire around, 
In clouds of smoke abandoning the fight ; 
But his own thundering peals proclaim his flight." 
So in Marvell's The First Anniversary, 361, 362 : 
"An hideous shoal of wood Leviathans, 
Armed with three tire of brazen hurricanes." 

609 27. The two speeches are full of obvious quibbles. 

620 27. Newton notes that the speech is appropriate to the 
character of Belial as drawn in the first two books of the poem ; that it 
could not come from the statesman-angel Beelzebub or the fierce 
warrior-angel Moloch. There Belial was described as a god of the 
tmwarlike (i. 493 502), himself "timorous and slothful" (ll. 117), and 
here, in the great battle, "we find him celebrated for nothing but that 
scoffing speech" (Addison). 

622. urged home, i.e. thoroughly, to the full effect ; frequent in 
Shakespeare; cf. King Lear, III. 3. 13, "revenged home," and III. 
4. 1 6, "I will punish home." 

625, 626. Cf. Twelfth Night, in. i. 89, and The Two Gentlemen of 
Verona, II. 5. 28: " Speed. I understand thee not...Launce. My staff 
understands me." 

635. Vergil's furor arma ministrat, ^En. I. 150. 

64446. Cf. II. 539, 540. shaggy; cf. IV. 224, Lycidas, 54. 
It is one of Gray's many Miltonic classical touches ; cf. The Bard, 
11, 12 : 

" As down the steep of Snowdon's shaggy side 

He wound with toilsome march his long array." 
Similar is Lat. horrens or horridus applied to woodland scenery. 

665. jaculation, l^a&.jacidatio, 'a casting, hurling.' Addison com- 
pares the classical legends about Pelion and Ossa in the Giants' war. 

668, 669. Cf. II. 99396. 

670. On the first day the struggle of the angels only makes Heaven 
resound (217, 218); now it threatens to wreck the whole fabric of 
the Empyrean. 

673. i.e. guiding all things, directing the Universe. M. seems 
to use "sum of things " = the summarum summa of Lucretius (v. 362), 
i.e. the All, the Universe. "The All" and " this All " (r65e TO irav 
Timaus 37 D) are favourite phrases of Drummond for the Universe. 



524 PARADISE LOST. BOOK VI. 

Cf. Spenser's Hymne of Heavenly Beautie describing the creation of 
the Universe, 41, 42: 

"And, last, that mightie shining christall wall, 

Wherewith he hath encompassed this All." 
674. advised, advisedly, purposely. 

679. assessor, i.e. the sharer of his throne lit. 'one who sits by.' 
This literal use occurs in Tennyson's Queen Mary, i. 5 : 

" He slew not him alone who wore the purple, 

But his assessor in the throne." 

681, 682. i.e. in whose face that which is invisible namely, what 
I by Deity am is visibly beheld. Cf. Colos. i. 15, "Who is the 
image of the invisible God." So in P. L. III. 138 42, 38487, 
viz. 192 96, X. 63 67. M. expounds the idea in The Christian 
Doctrine, i. 5 (P. W. IV. 14245). 

invisible,., beheld visibly; an instance of oxymoron. invisible', 
apparently a noun = ' the invisible thing.' 

691, 692. suspend^ delay. The sense is 'Though sin has done 
them some harm, yet it has not made them so inferior to the good 
angels that the latter can win a decisive victory.' 

695. " Within the compass of this one book we have all the variety 
of battles that can well be conceived. We have a single combat, and a 
general engagement " under many phases (Newton). And, as in Homer, 
the "battles still rise one above another, and improve in horror" 
(Addison). 

698. the main, the whole "continent" (474) of Heaven, or the 
whole Universe. For main'' land ' (not sea, as commonly), cf. King 
Lear, in. i. 5, 6 : 

" Bids the wind blow the earth into the sea, 

Or swell the curled waters 'bove the main " ; 
and Tennyson, The Princess, iv. : 

" Each was like a Druid rock ; 
Or like a spire of land that stands apart 
Cleft from the main, and wail'd about with mews." 
703. virtue ; cf. III. 586. 
709. Cf. v. 605 ; Psalm xlv. 7. 

715, 716. Contrast v. 716 ("the Sons of Morn "). utter, outer. 
719 21. Slightly varied in X. 63 67. 

724 34. There are allusions to: John xvii. i, 4, 5, 21 23 (cf. 

P. L. xi. 44) ; Matt. xvii. 5 (cf. P. R. I. 85) ; i Cor. xv. 28 ; Ps. cxxxix. 21. 

738, 739. prepared. Cf. 53 55 ; and .see Rev. xx. i, 2 ; 2 Pet. ii. 

4; and Jude 6. The same reference occurs in 186, I. 48, u. 169, in. 82, 

XII. 454. the undying worm', Isai. Ixvi. 24; Mark ix. 44. 



NOTES. 525 

744. Contrast II. 23943. 

747. See v. 606 ; cf. 679, 892. 

748. Newton says " Milton, by continuing the war for three days, 
and reserving the victory upon the third for the Messiah alone, plainly 
alludes to the circumstances of his death and resurrection." M. was 
not alone in dividing the struggle into three parts. The Schoolmen 
who discussed most things discussed the point how long the contest 
lasted, and (writes Reginald Scot) "the greatest number affirme that... 
it stood with God's justice to give them [the rebellious angels] three 
warnings ; so as at the third warning Lucifer fell downe like led to the 
bottom of hell," Discourse, Nicholson's ed., p. 423. Another point 
is M. has assigned the overthrow of the rebels to Messiah, whereas 
in Rev. xii. 3 9 it is implied that Michael was their vanquisher ; 
cf., however, verse n on which M. may have based his view. In any 
case it belonged to the scheme of his work to make the Messiah the 
subduer of Satan in Heaven, as on earth : the first victory foreshadows 
that later one by which Paradise Lost became for humanity Paradise 
Regained. 

749 59- This description of the throne-chariot of the Deity 
(IV. 973 76, VII. 218 20), and of the Cherubic Shapes whereby it 
was convoyed, is modelled very closely on Ezekiel's Vision, chap. i. 
M. has worked in detail after detail of the Scriptural original, and 
the whole chapter should be compared with his narrative. Paradise 
Lost contains no more striking instance of his skill in adapting 
Scripture to the purposes of his work. With 752 cf. vii. 204. 

756. beryl, a kind of crystal. Fr. driller, whence brilliant, represents 
a corruption of Lat. beryllus Gk. (3rjpvos. careering, darting; the 
metaphor of a tournament. Cf. I. 766. 

758. sapphire throne ; cf. Collins, Ode on the Poetical Character, 2, 
one of the poems in which the influence of Milton, that affected Collins's 
style so greatly, is specially conspicuous. 

760. panoply, "the whole armour of God (iravoTrta)," Ephes. 
vi. ii. 

761. Concerning the much-discussed Urim, it seems to be agreed 
that they were certain material objects placed inside the breastplate of 
judgment which formed part of the high priest's ephod (Exod. xxviii. 
30) ; and that they were a means by which, through him, the will of 
Jehovah was ascertained. It has been variously suggested that these 
objects were (i) diamonds and other precious stones, (2) metal slips 
marked with affirmative and negative answers, (3) small images like the 
' teraphim.' M. (cf. P. R. in. 1315) takes the first view, so that the 
general sense is 'armed in celestial equipment wrought of precious 



526 PARADISE LOST. BOOK VI. 

stones * ; cf. 364, and the passage from An Apology for Smectymnuus, 
quoted at 831 ("arming in complete diamond"). Tennyson seems to 
follow this idea, where he describes (The Coming of Arthur, 297, 298) 
King Arthur's sword Excalibur as 

" rich 

With jewels, elfin Urim, on the hilt," 
i.e. mysterious precious stones placed there magically. 

That famous Elizabethan book, Reginald Scot's Discovericof Witch- 
craft (1584), speaks of the Jews being "informed by Urim: so as 
the preests by the brightness of the twelve pretious stones conteined 
therein, could prognosticate or expound anie thing " (bk. IX. chap. v. 
p. 139, Nicholson's ed.). 

The word Urim is said to mean * light ' whence the view that the 
Urim were of Egyptian origin, and connected with the symbol of light 
worn by members of the priestly caste in Egypt ; or ' revelation ' cf. 
the rendering of it in the Septuagint, 17 S^Xoxris, and in the Vulgate, 
doctrina. In The Reason of Church Government, I. 5, Milton 
speaks of "the oracle of urim" and "the judgment of urim," P. W. 

455- 

762, 763. Cf. the personification of Victory in Richard III. V. 
3. 79, "Fortune and Victory sit on thy helm" (i.e. helmet). So 
Expectation was personified, 306. Todd quotes Richard II. I. 3. 129 
(" eagle- winged pride "). 

766. bickering^ quivering, flashing. 

767 70. Jude 14; Ps. Ixviii. 17; Rev. v. n. 

770. Tennyson remarked on the "grand pause" in the line after 
God, lending tremendous emphasis. 

771. "And he rode upon a cherub and did fly," 2 Sam. xxii. n; 
Ps. xviii. 10. M. generally uses sublime = Lat. sublimis in its literal 
sense, 'uplifted'; cf. II. 528. 

772. M. always scans crystdlline', cf. vn. 271, S. A. 546, "Allure 
thee from the cool crystalline stream." 

776. " And then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in 
heaven," Mat. xxiv. 30. 

777. reduced, brought back Lat. reduxit cf. x. 438. The word 
is used similarly in the sense 'to bring back' in his treatise On 
Education (P. W. III. 472). 

779. their Head, i.e. the Messiah; see v. 606. Editors qv 
Romans xii. 5, Colossians i. 18. 

787. insensate, senseless ; once elsewhere in M. cf. S. A. 
1685, where the context shows that it is a very strong word. 

788. Vergil's tantcene animis calestibus ira? JEn. I. u. Cf. The 



NOTES. 527 

Rape of the Lock, u, 12 : 

"In tasks so bold can little men engage? 

And in soft bosoms dwells such mighty rage?" 
So IX. 729, 730. Cf. iv. 118, 119, note. 

791. hardened more; like Pharaoh. 

797. lasty at last ; an obvious suggestion is lost. 

80 1. Exodus xiv. 13. 

808. "Vengeance is mine; I will repay, saith the Lord," Romans 
xii. 19 ; cf. Deuteronomy xxxii. 35. 

831 41. This description recalls ill. 392 96, and An Apology 
for Smectymmms : " then Zeal, whose substance is ethereal, arming in 
complete diamond [cf. 364, 760, 761], ascends his fiery chariot, drawn 
with two blazing meteors, figured like beasts, resembling two of those 
four which Ezekiel and St John saw... with these the invincible warrior, 
Zeal, shaking loosely the slack reins, drives over the heads of scarlet 
prelates... bruising their stiff necks under his flaming wheels," P. W. 
in. 129. 

833, 834. Cf. 711, 712. In I. 105 Satan boasts that the battle did 
shake the throne. Thyer compares Hesiod, Theogony 841. 

838. astonished, thunder-struck, stupefied. 

841. Spenser has the accentuation prostrate', cf. The Faerie 
Queene, III. 12. 39. 

842, 843. " And [they] said to the mountains and rocks, Fall on us, 
and hide us from the... wrath of the Lamb," Rev. vi. 16. The irony of 
the lines, in view of 639 66, is obvious. 

86466. Cf. I. 4449, 169 77, P. R. I. 90, 360, 361. The 
"bottomless pit" is the lowest region of Hell that "fiery gulf" on 
which the angels are depicted as tossing in I. 52. In the Doctrine and 
Discipline of Divorce, 3, M. calls it "that uttermost and bottomless gulf 
of chaos, deeper from holy bliss than the world's diameter multiplied " 
(P. W. in. 224). Similar allusions to "the bottomless pit" occur in 
The Tenure of Kings (end), Areopagitica, and Of Reformation in 
England, n. (P. W. II. 47, 61, 417). 

868. ruining, falling; see III. 258, and cf. Tennyson, Lucretius. 

869, 870. Repeated from the Nativity Ode, 123; see the note on 
vii. 253 60. Cf. positi late fundamina Mundi in Milton's lines 
Ad Patrem, 47. her, of Hell. 

871. nine', traditionally a significant number. See I. 50. 

873. i.e. through his wild, disordered realm (" the wasteful deep ") ; 
cf. vn. 271, 272, x. 283. In n. 993 96 Chaos, speaking of the 
expulsion of the angels, tells Satan how he "saw and heard." 

874, 875. Isaiah v. 14. 



528 PARADISE LOST. BOOK VI. 

877. Cf. ii. 823. Tasso, ix. 59, calls it "the house of grief and 
pain" (Newton). Compare too Dante's synonyms for Hell, such as 
"the doleful houses" (dolenti case} and "the doleful realm" (dolente 
regno} see the Inferno, viu. 120, Purgatorio, vn. 22. 

880 92. Rev. xii. 10, iv. n ; i Tim. iii. 16; Heb. i. 3. Cf. in. 
39799- 

885. The grave of Samson Agonistes (1735) is shaded with 
"branching palm," a symbol of victory. See the Ode At a Solemn 
Music, 14, and cf. Crashaw's picture of the "Assembly of the Saints" 
"The palm blooms in each hand, the garland on each brow." See 
Rev. vii. 9. 

886. sung triumph. M. is thinking perhaps of the Lat. lo 
Triiimphe, the cry raised by the crowd and soldiers when a Roman 
general celebrated his triumph. Cf. Horace, Odes iv. 2. 49, 50, 
Epodes ix. 21, 23. 

893. Cf. V. 570 74. " The reader cannot but admire the dignity 
and emphasis with which the Angel's speech concludes. The same brief 
sentences, and solemn pauses, may be observed in the fine moral 
instruction which the heavenly messenger gives Adam, at the close of 
the eighth book " (Todd). 

899. There is a ring of Milton in Pope's couplet (Essay on Man, 
I. 127, 128) : 

"Aspiring to be gods, if angels fell, 
Aspiring to be angels, men rebel." 
See ix. 685712, note. 

900. he who ; him would have been more regular. But he 
sounds more emphatic, and the context requires strong emphasis 
(Dunster). 

900906. These lines give the two main motives of Satan's resolve 
to ruin mankind, namely, envy and desire to spite God by marring his 
creatures : man shall be ruined that Satan may be revenged on the 
Most High for his defeat (iv. u, 12). 

907. Cf. P. R. i. 397, 398 ; Satan is the speaker : 

" Envy, they say, excites me, thus to gain 

Companions of my misery and woe ! " 

It is the sentiment expressed in the proverbial line of unknown origin, 
solamen miseris socios habuisse doloris (or malorum). So Shakespeare, 
Lucrece, 790, 791 : 

"And fellowship in woe doth woe assuage, 

As .palmers' chat makes short their pilgrimage," 
and Romeo and Juliet ', in. 2. 116. When Faustus asks why Lucifer 
tempts mortals Mephistophiles in reply quotes the line solamen miseris 



NOTES. 529 

etc., Faustus, v. 42 where Dr Ward in his note cites Seneca, De Con- 
solatione xn. 2 : est autem hoc ipsum solatii loco t inter multos dolorem 
suttm dividers. See X. 126 28. 

Sir Thomas Browne gives the idea a moral turn : " Delude not 
thyself into iniquities from participation or community, which abate the 
sense but not the obliquity of them. To conceive sins less or less of 
sins, because others also transgress, were morally to commit that natural 
fallacy of man, to take comfort from society, and think adversities less 
because others also suffer them" (Christian Morals, I. xviii.). 

909. thy weaker; Eve, "the weaker vessel," i Pet. iii. 7. 



BOOK VII. 

i 39. With this exordium compare I. I 26; III. I 55; IX. 
i 47. All four passages mark a significant stage in the development 
of the story, and in each passage the notion implied in "above the 
Olympian hill I soar" finds expression. The first serves as prelude to 
the whole poem and indicates the subject ; the second transfers the 
scene of the action from Hell to Heaven, and later to the Earth ; 
the third is a pause before the history of Creation is unfolded; and 
the fourth prepares us for the Temptation and Fall of Man. Compare 
Homer's method of stopping to invoke the Muse afresh before some 
great event is narrated. Pope parodies this epic convention in the 
Argument and (very Miltonic) first lines of the fourth book of The 
Dunciad. 

We may note in these four passages the number of personal allu- 
sions, e.g. to Milton's consciousness of the greatness of his subject 
(i. 12 16, 2426, in. 54, 55, vn. 1215, ix. 1319, 4143); his 
blindness (in. 21 55, vn. 27); loneliness (vn. 28); and advanced 
years (ix. 45). 

i . descend from Heaven ; cf. Horace's descende calo, . . Calliope Odes 
ill. 4. i, 2. Here the invocation is specially appropriate as the scene 
of the action of the poem passes literally from Heaven to Earth (the 
Creation of which is about to be described). 

2 if rightly thou art called} an indication that he was conscious 
of using the name not in its usual classical sense. 

3. the Olympian hill Mount Olympus (cf. I. 516) in the north of 
Greece. Like Mount Helicon in Bceotia, it was a resort of the Muses 

P. L. 34 



530 PARADISE LOST. BOOK VII. 

to whom classical poets appealed for inspiration. Hence lines 3, 4 are a 
figurative way of claiming loftier inspiration than that of classical poets. 

3, 4. soar... flight... wing; his favourite metaphor to describe up- 
lifting inspiration; cf. I. 14, note, P. R. I. 14. 

Pegasus was the famous winged horse (cf. "flying," 17) that 
ascended to the heaven of the classical gods and afterwards used to bear 
the thunder and lightning of Zeus. M. had ascended far higher, into 
the Heaven of the Almighty. 

5. "Urania" means 'the Heavenly one' and it is on a Heavenly 
power that he calls, not on the classical Muse named 'Urania.' See 
pp. 68688. 

In this book of Paradise Lost the classical influence, which pre- 
dominated in the last, naturally gives way to the Biblical (Genesis) ; the 
subject being the Creation. 

6. nor of', understand art from the verb in the next line. 

7. old; often in M. almost a title of reverence; cf. "Mount 
Casius old," II. 593 ; "the fable of Bellerus old," Lycidas, 160. Cold 
is a needless change. 

8 12. The allusion is to Proverbs viii. 23 30, where the word 
rendered "rejoicing" in verse 30 may mean 'playing' (ludens in 
the Vulgate); cf. "didst play," 10. M. quotes the verse in Tetra- 
chordon (P. W. III. 331) and substitutes "playing" for "rejoicing" 
(Newton). 

9. eternal Wisdom. "The Eternal Wisdom created man an 
excellent creature, though he fain would unmake himself and return into 
nothing ; and though he seek his felicity among the reasonless wights, 
He hath fixed it above" (Drummond, A Cypress Grove, Works, 
II. 274). 

converse, live in company with (Lat. convtrsari) ; cf. n. 184. 

13. In books in., v., vi., he has described events which took 
place in the " Heaven of Heavens," i.e. the Empyrean. 

14. drawn ; cf. VIII. 284. 

15. thy tempering, tempered by thee, i.e. made to suit the 
breathing of "an earthly guest." 

16. element, i.e. the Earth. 

17. He implies that, guided by the Muse (12), he has been borne 
aloft on a winged Pegasus of his own, superior to the Pegasus (4) of 
mythology. Diva Pegasea is a synonym for the Muse in Dante, 
Paradiso, xvm. 82. unreined, unbridled, Lat. infrenis. 

18. 19. An allusion to the legend that Bellerophon attempted to 
ascend to heaven on the back of Pegasus, but was flung to the ground. 
Incurring the anger of the gods, he roamed alone in the Aleian plain, 



NOTES. 53 * 

'the land of wandering' (Gk. 0X9; = ' wandering'), became distracted and 
died; cf. Homer, Iliad ' vi. 200 202. clime t region ; cf. II. 572. 

20. erroneous-, in the literal sense 'straying' (Lat. erroneus). 

21. Henceforth the action of the poem, of which "half remains 
unsung," takes place on Earth (save in some brief passages of books 
x., XL). 

22. the -visible diurnal sphere, i.e. "the Astronomical Universe of 
Man, which appears to revolve round the Earth daily in twenty-four 
hours" (Masson). Wordsworth (The Prelude, I. 459, 460), may have 
recollected the line. 

23. rapt, caught up. 

the pole, the highest point of the Universe, i.e. where it is fastened 
to the golden chain which suspends it from the Empyrean. 

2 5 39- M - refers to his own position after the Restoration. There 
are similar allusions in S. A. ; see 697 700, with notes. 

26. The verbal repetition gives an effect of pathos ; cf. S. A. 80, 81. 
Note how he inverts the order of the words ; cf. 184 87. 

Perhaps the most remarkable example of the poetic device of 
repetition in Paradise Lost is IV. 641 56. It is a favourite artifice 
(expressive of great emphasis) with Tennyson, from whose works many 
striking illustrations might be quoted, e.g. the passage in Enoch Arden 
beginning "The splendour on the waters," and the description of the 
descent of the Grail in the Holy Grail, 473 76, where each line 
commences with " blood-red." In the Marriage of Geraint five 
consecutive lines start on the same note : 

"Forgetful of his promise to the king, 

Forgetful of the falcon and the hunt, 

Forgetful of the tilt and tournament, 

Forgetful of his glory and his name, 

Forgetful of his princedom and its cares." 

evil tongues. M. had many bitter enemies among the Royalist 
party ; as was only natural considering the attitude which he had 
adopted towards Charles I. in The Tenure of Kings and Eikonoklastes. 
Johnson (not always a friendly critic of the poet) grimly remarks that 
Milton himself had " never spared any asperity of reproach or brutality 
of insolence" in his polemical writings against Salmasius and others. 

27. The original of Wordsworth's line " Darkness before, and 
danger's voice behind" in the passage on Milton in The Prehule, III. 

darkness, i.e. blindness. Cf. I. 22, ill. 45. 

dangers. At the Restoration M. was arrested and imprisoned for 
some months, probably from August to December 1660, for having 
defended the execution of Charles I. ; and though, thanks to the efforts 

342 



532 PARADISE LOST. BOOK VII. 

of Andrew Marvell (see pp. 365, 366) and some other influential friends 
he was eventually allowed to take advantage of the Act of Oblivion 
(1660), yet he must for a time have felt insecure. After the pub- 
lication of his great work his position was different. He was, says 
Burnet, "much visited by all strangers, and much admired by all at 
home, for the poems he wrote... chiefly that of ' Paradise Lost.'" 

28. solitude. It has been justly said of Milton that throughout his 
life as a whole he " was aloof and solitary beyond any other great 
English writer." Cf. Wordsworth's famous description of him ("Thy 
soul was like a Star, and dwelt apart "). 

29. nightly. Cf. in. 29 32 and ix. 2124 (notes). "The poet 
might here remember the nightly vision of Beatrice to Dante, Purgatorio, 
xxx. 133" (Todd). 

30. purples, dyes with rosy hues. 

31. Cf. Horace, Satires I. 10. 74, contentus pauds lector ibus. As 
to the reception accorded to Paradise Lost on its publication see the 
Introduction. Johnson says : " The sale, if it be considered, will justify 
the public.... The call for books was not in Milton's age, what it is 
at present [1779 1781]." He notes that between 1623 and 1664 there 
were only two editions, perhaps one thousand copies in all, of the 
works of Shakespeare. 

Part of this line (31) is quoted by Wordsworth in the opening of 
The Recluse, and the outline of his subject that follows is full of the 
atmosphere of Paradise Lost. 

32 38. Cf. the similar allusion in Lycidas, 58 63, to the classical 
legend that Orpheus was torn to pieces, and his head thrown into the 
river Hebrus, by Thracian women in their Bacchanalian orgies, his 
mother Calliope, the Muse of epic poetry, being unable to do aught for 
his defence. See Ovid, Metamorphoses xi. i 55, Vergil, Georg. iv. 
517 27; and cf. A Midsummer- Nigh?* Dream, v. 48, 49 : 
"The riot of the tipsy Bacchanals, 

Tearing the Thracian singer in their rage." 

No doubt M. intends a comparison between the " wild rout " (a con- 
temptuous word) of Bacchanals and the dissolute court of Charles II., 
and perhaps hints (cf. "dangers," 27) that he himseh may suffer like 
Orpheus. Other passages in his poems which probably refer to the 
court are I. 497, P. R. II. 44 48, 183 ; see also the notes on S. A. 
1418, 1605 1607. 

34. J^hracian ; Orpheus lived in a cave in Thrace. 

35. Rhodope, a mountain range in Thrace; the Hebrus on the 
banks of which Orpheus was killed rises in Rhodope. Ovid calls 
Orpheus " Rhodopeius heros" (Metamorphoses X. 50). Cf. Pope, Ode 
on St Cecilia's Day, VI. 



NOTES. 533 

36. to rapture, i.e. to drink in strains that enraptured them, 
though the "revellers" were deaf to the harmony. Cf. the song 
" Orpheus with his lute made trees," Henry VIII. III. i. 3. 

37. harp, the golden lyre given to Orpheus by Apollo. 

39. thou, Urania, she, the Muse, Calliope. M. always refers 
contemptuously to classical mythology as mere 'fables' or 'dreams'; 
cf. I. 197, II. 627. 

41. affable-, see vm. 648, 649, and cf. v. 221, "Raphael, the 
sociable Spirit." Probably M. in depicting Raphael thus as a power 
friendly to man is thinking of the story in the Apocryphal Book of 
Tobit how the archangel befriended Tobias; cf. the two allusions to it, 
iv. 16771, v. 22123. 

43. apostasy, falling away from his obedience to God ; cf. 610. 

46. Genesis ii. 1 7. 

50. his consorted Eve, Eve his consort or partner. Cf. Richard IL 
v. 3. 138, "With all the rest of that consorted crew," i.e. associated, 
acting as partners. 

52. admiration, wonder. 

57. redounded, recoiled, came back upon. 

59 69. The main sentence is 'Whence Adam repealed the 
doubts and, being led on with desire to know, proceeded (69) 
to ask.' 

whence, from which subject, repealed, recalled ; he did not let his 
thoughts dwell any longer on that matter. For repeal= Fr. rappeler, in 
the literal sense 'to recall, 'cf.ywzw.y Ccesar, ill. i. 51, Coriolanus, v. 5. 5. 

62. nearer, more closely, i.e. than the subjects just mentioned 
concerned him. 

63. M., as we have seen, uses Heaven (i) 'the Empyrean,' i.e. 
'the abode of the Almighty,' (2) 'the sky,' i.e. of this World. Here 
'sky' is meant ; so in 86, 167, 232, 274, 283. 

conspicuous, visible to the eye, as opposed to the unseen Empyrean, 
the affairs of which concerned Adam less. 

65. Eden-, see iv. 132, note. 

66. whose drouth, who being still thirsty ; abstract for concrete. 
72. interpreter, expounder, explainer ; cf. Interpres diviim (said of 

Mercury), sEneid iv. 378. Cf. Ben Jonson, Discoveries, cxix. : 
' ' Speech is the only benefit man hath to express his excellency of mind 
above other creatures. It is the instrument of society; therefore 
Mercury, who is the president of language, is called deorum homi- 
numque interpret" See in. 157. 

79. the end, the object, purpose; cf. Revelation iv. n. 

88, 89. yields or fills ; " yields space to all bodies, and again fills 



534 PARADISE LOST. BOOK VII. 

up the deserted space " (Richardson). Cf. II. 842, " the buxom 
air " = yielding. 

92. so late, i.e. after having rested " through all eternity." A 
reason is indicated in 150 60. 

94. absolved, was completed ; Lat. absolverc, ' to finish.' 

97. "Remember that thou magnify his work, which men behold," 
Job xxxvi. 24. 

98. wants, has to. run ; see 372, note. 

99. though steep ; i.e. "though he has passed the meridian and is 
now on his descent, promts" (Keightley). The standing-still of the 
sun was probably suggested by Joshua x. 12 14. 

102. his generation, how he was created. 

102, 103. i.e. and how Nature (the Earth and all its forms of 
animal and vegetable life) was born and arose from the Deep. 

unapparent, not appearing, invisible, because hidden in the darkness 
of Chaos ; cf. 233, 234. 

104. the star of evming, Hesperus ; the classical name of the planet 
Venus when it appeared after sunset ; seen before sunrise, it was called 
"Lucifer" (cf. 133). Cf. vm. 519, 520. 

106. Sleep ; personified, as in Comus, 554. watch, keep awake. 

1 1 6. infer, show, prove; cf. viu. 91, and 2 Henry IV. v. 5. 14. 

120. For the sentiment "knowledge within bounds," cf. vm. 

173-97- 

121. inventions, thoughts, foolish imaginations; cf. its use in 
Psalm cvi. 29, "Thus they provoked him. ..with their inventions." 

hope, hope for, i.e. to know. Elizabethans use hope transitively; 
cf. Airs Well That Ends Well, II. i. 163, "hopest thou my cure?" 
Cf. II. 234. 

122. Cf. i Timothy i. 17. 

123. Cf. Horace, Odes in. 29. 29, exitum  caliginosa node premit 
deus; and Vergil, ALneid vi. 267, pandere res alta terra et caligine 
jnersas. 

131. The name Lucifer, ' light-bringer ' (Gk. 0o><r06)os), is properly 
a Latin title of the morning-star, but it was applied by patristic writers 
to Satan, in allusion perhaps to the tradition of the original "brightness" 
of his person. Cf. the common misinterpretation of Isaiah xiv. 12 
(" How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer"), where "thou" refers 
to " Babylon," not to Satan, and the Hebrew word translated "Lucifer" 
should be rendered "day-star," as in the Revised Version. 

Milton says that " Lucifer" and " Satan" were the names given to 
the arch-rebel after his expulsion from Heaven : what he was called in 
Heaven we do not know. See I. 361 75, note, and v. 658, 659. In 



NOTES. 535 

each of the early drafts of Milton's contemplated drama of Paradise 
Lost the name " Lucifer," not " Satan," is assigned to him. No doubt, 
Milton substituted "Satan" as more distinctively Scriptural. 

13-2. 'Bright as Lucifer' was almost a proverb like 'proud as 
Lucifer.' Cf. Marlowe's Faustus, V. 155 : 

" beautiful 

As was bright Lucifer before his fall." 

The old Faust-book says: "Lucifer [i.e. Satan] was so illuminated 
that he far surpassed the brightness of the sun, and all the stars." This 
brightness was dimmed after Satan's fall (l. 97, 591 99, IV. 

8 35 4> 8 7o)- 

134. Cf. I. 45, and the familiar lines in Henry VIII. in. 2. 371, 

372: 

" And when he falls, he falls like Lucifer, 

Never to hope again." 

Cf. also Absalom and Achitophel, 273, 274. In the Areopagitica M. 
uses this image in mentioning (ad fin.} the downfall of the Court ("she 
is now fallen from the stars with Lucifer "). The " Fall of Lucifer" is 
one of the subjects of the York and Chester Miracle-plays. 

135. his place, the place prepared for him, viz. Hell; cf. Acts 
i. 25. 

136. Saints, i.e. the Heavenly beings who had remained loyal. 

137. "And, behold, a throne was set in heaven, and one sat on the 
throne," Revelation iv. 2. Cf. 556, 585, 586. 

139. Thyer suggested At last as the true reading. 

141. Cf. v. 643, note. 

142. us dispossessed', an absolute construction ; cf. "him destroyed," 
IX. 130, "me overthrown," S. A. 463. In Shakespeare, as now, the 
absolute case is the nominative ; but in older English it was the dative. 
Morris quotes Wyclif, Matthew xxviii. 13, "Thei han stolen him us 
slepinge" an exact parallel to "us dispossessed." I believe that in 
such cases M. meant the pronoun to be the dative and that he some- 
times employed this old idiom (with pronouns) as suggesting the Latin 
ablative absolute more than the nominative absolute does. Thus, " me 
overthrown" has more of a Latin sound than " overthrown." He 
also uses the nominative absolute with the present participle. 

143. fraud, crime, sin ; so Lat.fraus is used. 

144. Cf. v. 710. whom their place; cf. Psalm ciii. 16, "and the 
place thereof shall know it no more." So Job vii. 10. 

145 49- 1 ! 633 Satan, encouraging his downcast followers, 
boasts that their revolt had "emptied Heaven." 
146. station, post of duty. See #<& 6. 



536 PARADISE LOST. BOOK VII. 

152. i.e. which thing, viz. the "dispeopling" of Heaven, he foolishly 
supposes to damage me. 

157 61. Cf. xn. 369 71, note. 

162. inhabit lax, dwell at ease (having vanquished the rebels). 
Some explain * dwell at large' (cf. Lat. habitare laxe], as though 
the expulsion of the rebels gave the others more room in Heaven. 

16367. The Creation of the World is effected through the Son ; 
cf.John i. i 3, especially verse 3. See in. 170, 383, note. 

16466. Cf. Luke i. 35. 

168. "There are no limits to Chaos [='the Deep'], because I 
who fill it am infinite ; and it is not vacuous or empty, because I am 
everywhere in it, though I only exhibit my goodness in a limited space, 
i.e. in Heaven " (Keightley's note). 

I am, i.e. " boundless " = infinite. "Immensity and Infinity" are 
among the "attributes" of the Almighty on which M. discourses in 
The Christian Doctrine, I. i. 

175. the Filial Godhead, the divine Son (vi. 722); an abstract 
expression for a concrete seems specially appropriate when divine 
powers are spoken of. Cf. 587. 

178. Cf. II. 297, " By policy and long process of time." 

179. earthly notion, the intellect of man. Cf. King Lear, I. 4. 248, 
"his notion weakens "=' his mind is failing.' So in Macbeth, in. i. 83. 

182, 183. glory... good-will... peace. Luke. 13, 14. 
186. just, righteous; Christ is called "the just," i Peter iii. 18. 
188. See 615, 616, and i. 162, 163 ; and cf. Thomson, A Hymn : 
"From seeming evil still educing good, 

And better thence again, and better still." 

194. girt ', a constant Biblical metaphor of arming ; cf. Psalm 
xviii. 39, "For thou hast girded me with strength unto the battle"; 
xxx. n," thou hast put off my sackcloth, and girded me with gladness." 

196. See Hebrews i. 3, and cf. ill. 138 40. 

197. poured. Cf. n. 997, P. R. ill. 311. "The word shows the 
readiness and forwardness of the Angels... they were so earnest as not to 
stay to form themselves into regular order, but were poured numberless 
about His [the Messiah's] chariot " (Pearce). 

200. " The Lord hath opened his armoury." Jeremiah 1. 25. The 
sword with which Michael overcame Satan in the great battle in 
Heaven was "from the armoury of God" (vi. 321). 

201. "And I turned, and lifted up mine eyes, and looked, and, 
behold, there came four chariots out from between two mountains; 
and the mountains were mountains of brass," Zechariah vi. i. 

202. against, in readiness for. 



NOTES. 537 

204. Cf. vi. 750, 752. See Ezekieli. 20. 

205 207. Cf. v. 253 55. ever-during^ everlasting," 565. 

207. moving, producing harmonious sound by their motion. " The 
doors of Armida's palace turn on golden hinges," in Tasso, VI. 2 
(Todd). 

208. the King of Glory ; Psalm xxiv. 8. 

212. wasteful, like a desolate plain. For Milton's favourite allitera- 
tion w...wn 212 14, see II. 960, note, and cf. Lycidas, 13, "Unwept, 
and welter to the parching wind." 

215. Richardson explains: " There was such confusion in Chaos, 
as if on earth the sea in mountainous waves should rise from its very 
bottom to assault Heaven (i.e. the sky), and mix the centre of the 
globe with the extremities of it." Of course, Chaos has no centre 
or pole. 

216. "A magnificent line " (Tennyson). Note the effect of finality 
produced by the alliteration (...) and the assonance in the last two 
words of the verse. 

217. omnific, almighty; literally ' all-making.' 

218. For the throne-chariot of the Deity formed by the wings of 
the Cherubim see vi. 749 59. 

221. heard, i.e. and obeyed. With this passage compare the rapid 
sketch of the Creation given by Uriel, ill. 708 21. 

224. fervid, glowing, i.e. with motion. M. remembered Horace, 
Odes I. i. 4, 5. Cf. ii. 531, 532, note. 

225. the golden compasses, prepared. Cf. Proverbs viii. 27, " When 
he prepared the heavens, I was there: when he set a compass upon 
the face of the depth." 

226. circumscribe, mark out the limits of. So in the Paradiso, XIX. 
40 42 : " He who rolled the compass round the limit of the Universe, 
and within it marked out so much both hidden and revealed." 

228. one foot, i.e. of the compasses. 

229. For the word-order cf. 17, 270, 323, 477. See note on I. 

733- 

232. Milton's account of the Creation must be compared with 
Genesis i., ii. He follows the Scripture closely, especially where the 
Almighty speaks, but supplements it, giving free scope to his imagina- 
tion (Newton). See also Ovid, Metamorphoses I. 

233. unformed, formless ; see V. 471, note. 

darkness. In n. 961 63 he speaks of Night as the consort of Chaos 
and co-ruler of his realm, personifying them as spirits : an allegory by 
which we are to understand that the ' ' Abyss," i.e. Chaos, is a region 
of gloom. It is so represented in the poem always. See Genesis i. 2. 



538 PARADISE LOST. BOOK VII. 

23437. Cf. i. 1922. 

235. wings, i.e. as of a dove, the idea being based on Luke iii. 22 ; 
see the note on I. 21. 

the Spirit of God', in The Christian Doctrine, I. 7, Milton ex- 
plains that he understands this to mean, in this context, God's " divine 
power, rather than any person" of the Trinity. 

236. vital virtue, the efficacy of life. 

^37, 238. downward purged, caused to sink, i.e. down into Chaos. 
The language seems to be recalled in Pope's Essay on Criticism^ 
526,527: 

" But if in noble minds some dregs remain, 
Not yet purged off, of spleen and sour disdain." 

Milton's influence on Pope's diction has been observed already. See 
i. 423, 424; also xi. 244. 

tartareous, ' belonging to Tartarus or Hell ' ; hence ' gloomy. ' 

239 41. founded.., conglobed, established and caused to coalesce. 
At first the Universe carved out of Chaos is a "fluid mass" (237) of 
" matter unformed " (233). Now atoms (semina rerum] of a like nature 
are brought together so as to form a solid substance. 

I believe that by this process M. means us to understand the forma- 
tion of the Earth, and that in what follows, "the rest. ..disparted," he 
refers to the formation of the outer crust which encases the whole 
Universe. The air is diffused "between" the central Earth and this 
crust = the Primum Mobile. 

The rhythm of the passage seems to me to prove that founded and 
conglobed are past tenses, not participles. They are in antithesis to 
"Jluidmass " ; and conglobed also gives a contrast to " matter unformed" 
as it implies that the Earth, at first without form, now is moulded into 
a spherical form : cf. V. 649, "this globous Earth." 

239. founded; from Lat. fundare, 'to lay the foundation of; 
editors compare Psalm Ixxxix. u, Proverbs iii. 19. 

240. the rest, i.e. the matter which had not been used to form 
the Earth, several ; with the idea ' each thing to its own place.' 

241. disparted, separated in different directions (dis-}. 

sptin out the metaphor of a spindle drawing out the wool on a 
distaff. 

242. self-balanced. "By this he probably meant to express the 
adjustment of the Earth in the exact centre of the World " (Keightley). 
See v. 579 (note), and cf. " pendulous Earth," iv. 1000. 

243 52. Genesis i. 3 5. M. does not say that light was 
created now : it existed previously (i.e. before the Universe itself) 
and is now introduced into the new region. This accords with 



NOTES. 539 

III. i 6, where we read that light either existed from eternity and 
was thus "co-eternal" with the Almighty; or, if not existent "from 
eternity," was certainly the first thing made by the Almighty. 

244. ethereal, partaking of the nature of ether. Properly ether 
means very bright atmosphere ; light, therefore, may well be called 
'ethereal.' Bacon speaks of the "four mutable elements and one 
immutable fifth Essence," i.e. the " quintessence." (Essay Of Atheism.} 
See in. 716, note. 

first of things', cf. in. i, "Hail, holy Light, offspring of Heaven 
first-born ! " and S. A. 83, " O first-created beam ! " 

245. sprung from, suddenly rose above; cf. the address to Light 
in in. 8 n. He chooses the east as the home of light because they 
are associated so in our minds through the rising of the Sun (cf. 370), 
but we must remember his view (which he would have supported by 
Genesis i. 3 compared with i. 14 18) that light exists independently 
of the Sun. 

248. tabernacle, dwelling ; cf. Psalm xix. 4, " In them hath he set 
a tabernacle for the sun." Cf. "her cloudy shrine," 360. 

250. by the hemisphere ; i.e. " one half of the sphere of the 
Universe being in darkness while the other is in light " (Masson). 
253 60. See Job xxxviii. 4, 7 ; cf. the Nativity Ode, 11724 : 
"Such music (as 'tis said) 
Before was never made, 

But when of old the Sons of Morning [= Angels] sung, 
While the Creator great 
His constellations set, 

And the well-balanced [cf. 242] world on hinges hung 
And cast the dark foundations [cf. 239] deep, 
And bid the weltering waves their oozy channel keep," 
Note the third draft of Milton's intended tragedy of Paradise Lost and 
the entry at the close of the first Act : " Chorus of Angels sing a hymne 
of y e Creation." 

255. exhaling-, cf. V. 642. 

257. the. ..orb, the globe of the Universe : " this great round," 267. 
261 74. Genesis i. 68. There are "waters" in the Universe 
because Chaos, of which it was a portion, was a kind of sea (210 
15). At first these waters formed one great "Deep " (245) : now they 
are divided. Part are collected round the Earth, the middle point of 
the Universe, and cover it (276 82). Part are placed in the Ninth or 
Crystalline Sphere, i.e. in the uttermost but one of the regions of 
space that surround the Earth. The " firmament," according to M., 
is the expanse of air, stretching from the Earth to this Crystalline 



540 PARADISE LOST. BOOK VII. 

Sphere (263 67). Hence the "firmament" intervenes between and 
"divides" (262, 269) the waters that flow immediately round the Earth 
and the waters of the Crystalline Sphere: the former being "the 
waters which were under the firmament," the latter "the waters which 
were above the firmament" (Genesis i. 7); as M. says, " The waters 
underneath" and "those above" (268). 

264. In Genesis i. 6, the margin has expansion instead vf firmament. 
Cf. 340- 

266. the uttermost convex ', the farthest rim. 

271. crystalline, clear as crystal, glassy; cf. 619, note. M. always 
scans crystalline (like Latin crystdllinus) ; cf. in. 482, VI. 772. Contrast 
Cymbeline, V. 4. 113, "Mount, eagle, to my palace crystalline." 

misrule. Cf. the allusion in vi. 871 73 to the "wild anarchy" of 
Chaos. 

272. Cf. II. 898 910, where we read how the elements of Heat 
and Cold "strive for mastery" in Chaos, sometimes one, sometimes 
the other, ruling supreme: hence there are "fierce" and rapidly- 
changing " extremes " of temperature in Chaos. 

273. distemper, i.e. make the World (" the whole frame ") now too 
hot, now too cold. 

277. waters, i.e. those "under the firmament." embryon, in an 
undeveloped state, involved, wrapped ; Lat. involvere. 

281. Cf. the familiar phrase " mother earth " ; see As Yott Like It, 
I. 2. 213. 

282. genial, creative, fertilising. This seems to be partly the idea 
in Gray's "genial current of the soul"; see Tovey's note (Pitt Press 
ed.) on the Elegy, 52. So in the Essay on Man, I. 133, ill. 118. 

282 308. Genesis i. 9, 10. 

285. immediately; the effect of the commands is instantaneous; 
cf. "forthwith," 243 ; " He scarce had said," 313 ; "sudden," 317. 

The alliteration in 285, 286 is probably intended to convey an im- 
pression of bulk and solidity. See a different alliterative effect in 
480. 

28991. See Psalm civ. 7, 8. bottom, valley. 

293. In XII. 197, speaking of the passage of the Israelites through 
the Red Sea, he says that they walked " As on dry land, between two 
crystal walls" 

The whole picture is that of a great wave just before it breaks on 
the sea-shore. 

296. of armies thou hast heard. Raphael had described to Adam 
in bk. vi. the contests in Heaven between the good Angels and the 
rebels. 



NOTES. 541 

297. so ; Milton's usual way of completing a simile. Understand 
some verb (e.g. ' hastened ') from troop. 

300. soft-ebbing ; cf. XI. 847, 848. 

301, 302. i.e. either underground, or wandering over (cf. IV. 234) 
a wide circuit above ground. 

serpent, serpentine, error} cf. IV. 239. 

306. The slow, long-drawn rhythm suits the sense. 

309 38. Genesis . n 13. 

319. smelling', referring to herbs. 

321. swelling; a suitable epithet of the gourd, and in accordance 
with the classical descriptions, such as Propertius iv. 2. 43 (cceruleus 
cucumis tumidoque cucurbita ventre) and Georgic iv. 121, 122. The 
original editions have smelling, which is not appropriate in itself and 
not likely to have been repeated so soon after 319. Bentley made the 
change (Todd). corny reed cf. V. 23. 

322. embattled. Cf. the comparison in iv. 98083 between the 
bristling spears of an army and ears of corn. 

add; wrongly altered in some modern texts to and. Cf. Lat. adde 
introducing a fresh point or detail = * moreover, besides ' ; as in Horace, 
Satires II. 8. 71. humble, low-growing ; cf. Lat. humilis used of trees, 
as by Vergil, Eclog. iv. 2, humilesque myrica. 

323. hair, leaves and branches ; cf. Lat. coma used both of hair and 
foliage, implicit^ :Lat. implicit, ' entangled,' the p. p. of implicare. 

325. gemmed, budded ; an imitation of Lat. gemmare> ' to put forth 
buds,' from gemma, ' a bud.' 

327. tufts. Bacon recommends that a garden should be planted 
" with some pretty tufts of fruit trees" (Of Gardens). 

33137- See Genesis ii. 5, 6 ; and cf. The Idylls of the King : 

" she [Enid] did not weep, 
But o'er her meek eyes came a happy mist 
Like that which kept the heart, of Eden green 
Before the useful trouble of the rain." 

338. i.e. the chorus of Angels celebrated this day like the others. 
33986. Genesis i. 1419. Cf. in. 580, 581, note. 
342. circling; cf. P. R. I. 57, "the circling hours," and Gk. 
KVKdv ' to revolve,' as in Sophocles, Electra 1365. Perhaps Milton 
has in mind Homer's Trepnro(j.V(i)v eviavruv ('as the years go round'). 

351. vicissitude, alternation, Lat. vicissitude; cf. VI. 8. "All 
cannot be happy at once... there is a revolution and vicissitude of 
greatness" (Browne, Religio Medici, i. xvii.). And again: "the line 
of our lives is drawn with white and black vicissitudes," i.e. alternations 
of fortune (Christian Morals, II. x.). 



54 2 PARADISE LOST. BOOK VII. 

356. mould, substance ; a common meaning in M. ; cf. III. 709. 
358. See v. 2, note, and cf. Tennyson, The Gardener's Daughter '. 
" The heavens between their fairy fleeces pale 

Sow'd all their mystic gulfs with fleeting stars." 
362. firm, yet firm, i.e. although "porous." 

365. urns; used of vessels to hold water; see Titus Andronicus, 
ill. i. 17, where most editors adopt the correction urns for rums. 

366. the morning planet, Venus (cf. 104, note) ; commonly called 
"Lucifer" as the morning-star and then treated as masculine. The First 
Ed. had "his horns" (i.e. Lucifer's), the Second Ed. her (i.e. of 
Venus). 

367. 368. * By absorbing (being tinged with) or reflecting the sun's 
rays they increase their own small possession, i.e. store (Lat. peculium), 
of light.' For peculiar used as a noun cf. Pope, Moral Essays, I. 15, 16 : 

" There's some peculiar in each leaf and grain, 
Some unmark'd fibre, or some varying vein." 

372. invested, arrayed ; Lat. investire, ' to clothe.' to run ; cf. 
Psalm xix. 4, 5, "the sun, which... rejoiceth as a strong man to run a 
race. " See 98, 99. 

373. his longitude, his course direct from east to west; M. uses 
longitude where we say latitude (in. 574 76, note). 

374> 375- " Canst thou bind the sweet influences of Pleiades or 
loose the bands of Orion t" Job xxxviii. 31. The Pleiades rise about 
the spring equinox, and, according to a common belief, the Creation 
took place in spring indeed some said that before the Fall of Man 
there was no change of seasons, but "the eternal Spring" (iv. 268) 
"Perpetual smiled on Earth with vernant flowers" (x. 679). 

376. levelled west, due west exactly opposite. 

377. his mirror, i.e. reflecting the light from him. Cf. in. 730, 
and Dryden, An. III. 765, "Nor could the moon her borrowed light 
supply." So in his Religio Laid, i, 2 : 

" Dim as the borrowed beams of moon and stars 

To lonely, weary, wandering travellers." 

Dante applies the same term "mirror " (specchio) to the sun, because 
"he receives the divine light from above, the spheres intervening, and 
reflects it downwards," i.e. according to Dante's cosmology (note in the 
"Temple" edition of the Purgatorio, p. 46). 

378. none', emphatic as coming last; cf. iv. 675, 704, XI. 612. 

379. aspect, position (an astronomical term). For the accent see 
II. 301, note, and cf. Lucrece, 13, 14 : 

" Where mortal stars, as bright as heaven's beauties, 
With pure aspects did him peculiar duties." 



NOTES. 543 

382. dividual, divided, Lat. dividuus : she shares her "reign " with 
the stars. In xii. 85 dividual ' separable,' or ' separate.' 

387 448. Genesis i. 20 23. 

388. reptile, creeping things (reptilia, eJTrerd in the Septuagint). 
The term comprises fishes of all sorts, soul ; used as a collective term 
= ' creatures.' Note the marginal readings in Genesis i. 20. 

390. display 'ed, spread out; Lat. displicare, 'to un-fold,' Fr. 
deplier. 

393. by their kinds, according to their species. 

400. i.e. with fry (young fishes) and with shoals = sculls (402). 

403. bank the mid-sea ; as with a mackerel-shoal. 

406. waved, undulating in the water, dropt with gold, i.e. with 
gold spots. For a somewhat similar use cf. Cymbeline, n. 2. 38, 39 : 

"A mole cinque-spotted, like the crimson drops 
I' the bottom of a cowslip." 

407. attend, "watch" (408) for. 

409. jointed armour, scales ; lobsters and such like fish are referred 
to : a very appropriate comparison, smooth, the smooth sea ; cf. " on 
the level brine," Lycidas, 98. See ALneid v. 594, 595. 

410. bended', arching themselves as they rise and dive down again. 
dolphins, "i.e. porpoises, delphines" (Keightley). 

412. leviathan, the whale; cf. the similar description in I. 200 
205. Thomson imitates M. : 

" More to embroil the deep, leviathan 
And his unwieldy train, in dreadful sport, 
Tempest the brine'" (Winter, 1014 16). 
417. tepid-, their warmth serves to hatch the eggs. 

419. disclosed, unclosed, let out. Cf. Hamlet, III. i. 174, "the 
hatch and the disclose " ; also v. i. 310, where it is again used so. 

420. fledge, fledged. 

42 1. summed their pens, acquired their full complement of feathers ; 
the term sum is from falconry, sublime ; cf. VI. 771. 

422. Cf. XL 835, "sea-mews' clang" Lat. clangor is used of the 
cry of birds ; cf. Livy I. 34, aquila . . .cum magno clangore volitans. 

422, 423. i.e. viewed from a distance (cf. 556) the ground would 
have seemed to be " under a cloud," so great was the mass of birds. 
Or he might mean that the birds seemed to fly almost into the clouds. 

4 2 3, 4 2 4 " Doth the eagle mount up at thy command, and make 
her nest on high ? She dwelleth and abideth on the rock, upon the crag 
of the rock, and the strong place,"y<? xxxix. 27, 28. 

cedar-tops. Cf. Richard III, I. 3. 264, " Our aery [= eyry] buildeth 
in the cedar's top." 



544 PARADISE LOST. BOOK VII. 

425. loosely ', singly, not "in common " = together, wing; used 
transitively (n. 842). region, the upper air ; cf. Hamlet, n. 2. 509, 
607 ; so in Tennyson, In Memoriam, LXXVII. 

426. wedge, i.e. cleave as with a wedge. He is thinking (as in P. R. 
in. 309) of -the cuneus or ' wedge ' of the Roman army, viz. the forma- 
tion of troops into an acute angle, the point of which had to pierce 
into the massed forces of the enemy ; cf. Gk. fyfioXov. The migrations 
of some birds are described in similar language by Pliny, Natural 
History x. 32, and by Dante, Purgatorio, xxiv. 6466. Cf. too the 
Essay on Man, in. 105 109 : 

"Who bids the stork, Columbus-like, explore 
Heavens not his own, and worlds unknown before? 
Who calls the council, states the certain day, 
Who forms the phalanx, and who points the way?" 
A passage ('* When the cranes," etc.) in Somerville's Chase illustrates 
the immense influence of Milton's diction on the i8th century, poets. 
Crabbe, describing the flocks of wild-fowl passing over the east coast of 
England, says (The Borotigh, I. 220 23): 

" Far as the eye can glance on either side, 
In a broad space and level line they glide : 
All in their wedge-like figures from the North, 
Day after day, flight after flight go forth." 

428. caravan, troop ; probably the word then had something of its 
oriental associations. 

429. 430. " After a little time the bird that forms the apex or point 
[of the ' wedge ' or angle] quits it and falls back, and another takes 
his place" Keightley. Hence M. says " with mutual wing easing." 

430. prudent. " Yea, the stork in the heaven knoweth her ap- 
pointed times ; and the turtle and the crane and the swallow observe 
the time of their coming, "Jeremiah viii. 7. Cf. "intelligent of seasons, " 
427. Dante, who was fond of illustrations drawn from bird-life, has two 
crane-similes; cf. the Inferno, V. 46, 47 ("as the cranes go... making 
a long streak of themselves in the air "), and Purgatorio, xxvi. 43 45. 

432. floats, undulates, unnumbered, innumerable, "innumerous" 
(455). The rhythm is notable. 

434. painted; cf. picta volucres (&neid iv. 525). 

435- nightingale', cf. ill. 38 40, IV. 602, 603, V. 39 41. solemn ; 
cf. the description of it in  Penseroso, 56 64. See viii. 518. 

439. mantling, raised (viz. " wings ") so as to form a kind of 
mantle. 

441. the dank, the water, pennons, pinions, Lat. pennce. 

446. starry, starlike ; in the one place where Shakespeare uses 



NOTES. 545 

starry (" the starry welkin," A Midsummer- Night's Dream, III. 2. 356) 
it means ' adorned with stars.' eyes, the eye-shaped spots on the plumage 
of the peacock. 

45 9 8 - Genesis i. 24, 25. 

451. sou!', the First Ed. misprints Foule  Bentley corrected. 

453. each... their; cf. vin. 342, 343, 393; the plural their is due 
to the plural sense ; it refers back to the plural noun or pronoun with 
which each is in apposition. 

454> 455- teemed, brought forth; cf. Macbeth, iv. 3. 176, "Each 
minute teems a new one [grief]. " a birth. It is generally after a pre- 
position that a or an = ' one ' ; cf. Othello, II. 3. 212, "both at a birth." 

457. wons, dwells. 

461. rare, here and there, Lat. rarus. 

462. at once, together ; so in 475. broad herds, i.e. covering a wide 
area (with the implied notion ' numerous ') ; cf. Homer's phrase cthroXia 
7rXarP alyuv, Iliad XI. 679. 

463. calved, brought forth young ; cf. Coriolanus, in. i. 240. 

466. rampant, rearing up. brinded, brindled. 
ounce, a kind of lynx ; cf. iv. 344. 

467. libbard-, an Elizabethan form of the word leopard, so called 
because thought to be a cross between a lion (led) and a panther (pardus}. 

471. Behemoth, the elephant; cf. Thomson's Slimmer  

" in plaited mail 
Behemoth rears his head." 

474. river-horse, hippopotamus; Gk. ^TTTTOS + 7roraju6s. The verb 
understood is rose (472). 

476. worm ; the term includes serpents (cf. 482). The asp or serpent 
by which Cleopatra was killed is called a worm in Antony and Cleopatra, 
v. 2. 243, 256. Cf. ix. 1068. limber, flexible. 

477. smallest lineaments exact, very small, dainty limbs. For 
lineaments t limbs' generally, not 'features of the face,' cf. v. 278. 
exact = Lat. exactus, ' precise, accurate ' ; here ' delicately made, 
dainty.' 

478. liveries, dress. 

480. these ; referring to worm. The alliteration (especially ...) 
expresses length. Cf. Comus, 340, " With thy ong e veiled rule of 
streaming ight." Matthew Arnold uses the same obvious effect in The 
Scholar-Gipsy : " The line of festal light in Christ-Church Hall." 

482. minims, very small creatures. 

484. and added wings, and had wings as well as " snaky folds." 
Fabulous winged serpents such as dragons are meant. 

485. parsimonious, thrifty ; used in a good sense, emmet ; in 

p - L - 35 



546 PARADISE LOST. BOOK VII. 

origin the same word as ant. M. recollected Horace's description 
of the ant hand ignara ac non incauta futuri (Satires I. i. 35). 

486. Cf. Vergil, speaking of bees, ingentes animos angusto in 
pcctore versant (Georg. iv. 83). Note that " large " is not a mere trans- 
lation of ingentes ; it implies wisdom ; cf. P. R. III. 10, and i Kings iv. 
29, "God gave Solomon... largeness of heart." M. generally lends a 
fresh turn to what he borrows. 

487. Milton shows his republicanism. 

490. It was a common belief of Milton's time that the working-bees 
were female, the males being drones (so called from their droning buzz). 
Cf. Pericles, II. i. 50, 51, "We would purge the land of these drones, 
that rob the bee of her honey." 

493. Genesis ii. 19, 20. Cf. VI. 7376, VIII. 34254. 

495. Genesis iii. i. The s...s sounds in the whole description of 
the reptiles give a hissing effect. Cf. I. 768 75, note. 

" I hate sibilation in verse " (Tennyson). 

496. brazen, of the colour of brass ; see IX. 500, note. 

497. mane. In the famous description of the serpents that strangled 
Laocoon (sEneid II. 203 et seg.) Vergil speaks (206, 207) of their san- 
guineajuba, 'blood-red manes.' 

497,498. to thee not noxious. Fine 'irony.' 

501, 502. 'Earth, being complete in her attire, was smiling and 
fair.' Cf. Lat. ridere= t ^o be bright,' e.g. as a field with flowers. 

503. M. often uses a string of monosyllables to convey variety. 
Cf. II. 621. Tennyson uses such lines, e.g. often in St Simeon Stylites, 
where they give a suitable impression of austerity. 

was flown; for this Latinism cf. VI. 335. 

504. frequent, in throngs. 

505. the end, the object for whom all was done. In 505 34 M. 
recalled Ovid's Metamorphoses I. 76 86. 

506 10. M. treats man's "upright" (509) stature as a sign of his 
superiority to and authority over animals ; cf. IV. 288, 289, Conms, 52, 
53. One feels a suggestion of the old thought that the purpose of this 
"erection" of stature, peculiar to man, was "for to behold and look up 
toward heaven"; see Sir Thomas Browne's Vitlgar Errors, iv. i, 
where editors quote Cicero, De Natura Deorum II. 56, and Ovid, 
Metamorphoses I. 84 86. 

508. sanctity of reason, the divine attribute of reason; cf. v. 
48690. 

509. front, brow ; ~L,o... frons ; as in n. 302. 

510. from thence, therefore, i.e. through the possession of these 
qualities. 



NOTES. 547 

511. magnanimous, of lofty mind, to correspond with, so as to 
hold intercourse or ' be in sympathy ' with. 

517, 518. Lines 163 66, 170, 171, 192220, implied that the 
Father remained in Heaven while the Son was sent forth ; yet, in virtue 
of his "omnipresence" (168, 169, 588 90), the Father was present in 
the new Universe no less than in Heaven. Cf. "let us make " (519). 

519 34. Genesis i. 26 31. 

528. Cf. Hebreivs i. 3, "the express image of his person" (Revised 
Version "very"). Literally 'modelled,' Lat expressus hence 'exact.' 

535. wherever :. .created. That Adam was not created in Paradise, 
the "Garden," but was taken there afterwards, seems implied by 
Genesis ii. 8, 15. See vm. 296 99. 

537. Cf. "delicious Paradise," iv. 132. 

541. all sorts are here ; cf. v. 337 47. 

544. thou diest. In x. 210, 211 we read how the sentence passed 
upon Adam is relaxed, and "the instant stroke of death... removed," so 
that after his sin he is still suffered by the Almighty to live, but no 
longer in Paradise. 

547. In the famous allegory in II. 648 870 Sin is represented as 
the mother of Death. They are always in the poem introduced together, 
Death attending Sin as "her shadow" (ix. 12). 

561. thou heard* st', cf. Adam's own words, IV. 680 88. 

563. Even the planets, the 'wandering' bodies (see vili. 128, 129, 
note), stood still, stations ; so the First Edition; the Second has 
station. 

564. pomp, procession. 
565 67. Psalm xxiv. 7. 

569 73. The Old Testament often speaks of Angels visiting the 
Earth, and in in. 529 37 M. says that there were two aerial paths 
for their descent, one leading straight down from Heaven on to Mount 
Sion, the other extending over the whole Promised Land. In The 
Christian Doctrine, I. 9, M. deals with the ministry on Earth of 
Angels. 

577 578. Cf. IV. 976, "the road of Heaven star-paved." 

579. the Galaxy, ' the Milky way ' ; called lactece plagce ('the milky 
regions') in Milton's poem In Obitum Prtzsulis Eliensis, 60. Cf. 
Burton's Anatomy of Melancholy, II. 2. in, "that via lactea, a confused 
light of small Stars, like so many nailes in a door" (i. 382, ninth ed.); 
and Pope, Essay on Man, I. 101, 102: 

"His soul proud science never taught to stray 
Far as the solar walk or milky way." 

581. powdered with stars j a phrase in Sylvester's Du Bartas. 

35 2 



548 PARADISE LOST. BOOK VII. 

584, 585. the holy mount; cf. 141, v. 643 (note). 

591 93. Genesis ii. 2, 3, Exodus xx. n (whence "hallowed"). 

596. dulcimer', a stringed instrument, played with small hammers ; 
said to be the primitive type from which the pianoforte was developed. 
Mentioned in Daniel iii. 5, 10, 15, and probably of Babylonish origin. 
Our name for it comes from Spanish dulcemele, a dulcimer ; so called 
from its sweet sound (Lat. dulce + melos). 

all organs, wind instruments, opposed to the stringed instruments in 
597. Properly j^='that by which the sounds of wind instruments 
are regulated'; hence =' tone, notes.' M. speaks of a "lute or soft 
organ-stop waiting on elegant voices, either to religious, martial, or civil 
ditties," On Education. A skilled musician himself, he uses musical 
terms often, and precisely. 

597. on fret, i.e. produced upon frets. "On stringed instruments 
that have finger-boards, like the lute or guitar, the small pieces of 
wood or other material fixed transversely on the finger-board at regular 
intervals are called frets. The object they serve is to mark off the 
length of string required to produce a given note. Frets correspond in 
their use with the holes in the tube of a wind instrument." Grove's 
Dictionary of Music. 

599. unison, i.e. solo opposed to in chorus. 

599,600. incense.., fuming; set Rev. v. 3 5. Cf. XI. 17, 18. Milton 
"had seen their manner of incensing in the churches abroad" (Newton). 

605, 606. the Giant-angels; a comparison is implied between the 
rebellious Angels and the Giants of classical mythology who sought to 
expel Zeus and the gods from Olympus, thy thunders; see the account 
of the battle in Heaven, vi. 83466. Cf. Dryden, The Hind and the 
Panther, II. 535 37 (from the noble passage on the Catholic Church) : 
"Still when the giant-brood invades her throne, 
She stoops from heaven and meets them half-way down, 
And with paternal thunder vindicates her crown " ; 
where "giant-brood " is an echo of Samson Agonistes, 1247. 

617. "witness, let this World bear witness. 

619. the hyaline, " the glassy sea " = the Crystalline Sphere. Milton, 
"when he uses Greek words, sometimes gives the English with them, 
as in speaking of the rivers of Hell " (11. 577 83) Newton. Cf. 579. 

621, 622. M. refers more than once to the likelihood of the heavenly 
bodies being inhabited ; see vni. 153 58, and cf. the quotation from 
Burton's Anatomy of Melancholy in the note on vni. 14045. 

622, 623. thou knovfst their seasons ; a parenthesis, qualifying the 
suggestion that the stars will be fit for habitation (i.e. in respect of 
temperature) : the Angels do not know, but the Almighty does. 



NOTES. 549 

624. nether ocean, i.e. " the waters under the firmament." 
628 30. Cf. 519 34- See Psalm viii. 68. 
631, 632. O fortunalos nimium sua si bona norint, Vergil, Georg. 
II. 458. persevere, remain steadfastly ; cf. viii. 639. 

634. hallehtiah, 'praise ye the Lord'; cf. Psalm cxlvi. i, margin. 
636. face of things, external nature; all natural objects about us. 



BOOK VIII. 

The discourse on astronomy in this book (extending down to 
line 178) is interesting mainly as a proof that Milton was acquainted 
with the teaching of Copernicus. Indeed, though he accepts the 
Ptolemaic system throughout the poem, he makes Raphael refer to it 
and its later developments in not very complimentary terms (77 84) 
and seems to lean towards the Copernican theory. Grotius in his 
Adamus Exul, the tragedy on the Fall of Man with which M. is 
thought to have been acquainted, makes an angel explain to Adam the 
astronomical system and laws of the Universe. 

Some striking parallels to Milton's words are presented by the 
chapter in Burton's Anatomy of Melancholy entitled "a Digression of 
the Ayre" (n. 2. in), which is a review of then current systems and 
theories of astronomers. Astronomy (in which, as in so many other 
things, he really belonged to a past generation) evidently had a great 
attraction for Milton : hence the references to Galileo, the only one of 
his contemporaries alluded to 'in Paradise Lost. And how significant 
in itself is the famous reference in bk. I.! "'The Tuscan artist' 
that is the name which Milton gives to Galileo, as if to indicate that 
science and art are in inseparable conjunction, as they were in his own 
person, and in his own poetry" (Mackail). See I. 287 91, in. 
588 90, V. 261 63 (with notes), and the Areopagitica, P. W. II. 82. 
Dante, too, and Tennyson (says another critic) " loved the stars." 

i 4. In the First Edition of Paradise Lost the two books which 
are now VII. and VIII. of the poem formed only one book ; and after 
the line, "Aught not surpassing human measure, say" (vil. 640), came 
the line (641), "To whom thus Adam gratefully replied." In the 
Second Edition, when book vil. was divided into two books, M. added 
the three lines, "The Angel ended. ..fixed to hear," to introduce 
book VIII., and changed slightly what is now the fourth line of the 
book. Cf. the similar alteration at the beginning of book xn., which 
in the First Edition formed one book with the present book xi. 

i, charming  in the strong sense 'laying under a spell, enchanting.' 



5 SO PARADISE LOST. BOOK VIII. 

3. stood  perhaps =' remained, continued.' It is not Adam's 
jr attitude that is emphasised, but his great attention ; probably he sat 
(Richardson). 

12. Scan Attributed  cf. 107. 

14. resolve, explain, clear up. 

15. M. recollected Hamlet, n. 2. 310, "this goodly frame, the 
earth." Cf. "this universal frame " = the Universe, v. 154. 

16. Heaven, sky; it bears this sense in most passages of this book. 
See vn. 63, note. 

19 38. We have the same idea again in ix. 103 107. 

19. numbered', apparently = ' numerous' (cf. vi. 229, and Cymbeline, 
I. 6. 36), unless M. has in mind passages like Psalm cxlvii. 4, " He 
telleth the number of the stars." 

22. officiate, supply. 

23. opacous, dark, yielding no light; cf. 93 ("nor glistering"). 
punctual, small, no bigger than a point (Lat. punctum}. Cf. 

Drummond, A Cypress Grove : " This globe of the earth and water, 
which seemeth huge to us, in respect of the universe, compared with 
that wide, wide pavilion of heaven, is less than little, of no sensible 

quantity, and but as a point More, if the earth were not as a point, the 

stars could not still in all parts of it appear to us as of a like greatness" 
(Works, ii. 260). 

24. one day, i.e. only for one ; cf. one (emphatic) in 29. 

25. admire, wonder. 

32. sedentary, stationary (from Lat. sedere, ' to sit ') ; cf. 89, "Earth 
sitting still," and n. 927. 

33. If the Earth revolved, her circuit would be far less than that 
of the heavenly bodies. 

35 37. The construction is, * and receives as tribute her warmth 
and light, brought such an incalculable distance with "speed almost 
spiritual" (no).' 

40. Milton's reason for making Eve withdraw is seen later (354 
629). 

43. The number of monosyllables is, no doubt, intentional. They 
give a slow rhythm which suggests the calm dignity of Eve's movement. 

46. her nursery, things tended by her : an abstract expression for 
a concrete. We speak of a 'nursery-garden.' There is a beautiful 
picture in IX. 423 62 of Eve among her flowers. 

61. pomp, train. 

64. to Adani's doubt proposed, to the point of difficulty mentioned 
by Adam, i.e. in 25 38 ; cf. 13, "something yet of doubt remains." 

70, 71. this to attain ; referring probably to what has preceded 



NOTES. 551 

in 68, 69. 'To attain this knowledge, viz. of the seasons, hours etc., 
it makes no difference whether the heaven or the Earth moves. Such 
knowledge is within our comprehension ; but " the rest," viz. more 
abstruse points, God has concealed' (Newton). 

74> 75- ought,.. admire. There is one instance in Shakespeare of 
this construction; cf. Julius Casar, I. i. 3, "you ought not walk." 
Elsewhere he always has to cf. Julius Casar, n. i. 270. In Middle 
English the present infinitive was marked by the inflection en ; when 
this inflection became obsolete, to was used with the infinitive. Certain 
' anomalous ' verbs, however, on the analogy of auxiliary verbs, omitted 
the to, and there was much irregularity in the practice of Elizabethan 
writers. Cf. the two constructions with dare in modern English : 
' I dare say this ' and ' I dare to say.' 

78. Cf. II. 190, 191, note. 

wide, i.e. of the mark; 'erroneous'; cf. the adverb in Much Ado 
About Nothing, iv. i. 63, "Is my lord well, that he doth speak so 
wide?" 

80 84. The object of the devices which M. ridicules in these lines 
was to support the Ptolemaic theory of the circular motion of the 
heavenly bodies by accounting for difficulties which seemed to conflict 
with that theory. See Appendix, pp. 688 90. 

80. calculate', "make a computation of everything relating to 
them: their motions, distance, situation, etc." (Pearce). 

82. appearances, apparent sizes, motions, etc. of the heavenly 
bodies ; it was a technical term of astronomers, occurring often in 
Burton's chapter on Astronomy "a Digression of the Ayre " 
Anatomy of Melancholy, II. 2. in. sphere, the globe of the Universe; 
= " frame" in 81. 

83. " Centric are such spheres whose centre is the same with, and 
eccentric are such whose centres are different from, that of the Earth " 
(Richardson), scribbled; an intentionally contemptuous word. 

84. epicycle. "A small circle, having its centre on the circum- 
ference of a greater circle... In the Ptolemaic system of astronomy each 
of the ' seven planets ' was supposed to revolve in an epicycle, the centre 
of which moved along a greater circle called a deferent." New English 
Diet. 

orb in orb, sphere within sphere. 

86. who ; its antecedent is contained in thy (85) : * the reasoning of 
thee who art.' A common Shakespearian idiom ; cf. Twelfth Night, 
in. i. 69, "He must observe their mood on whom he jests," i.e. the 
mood of those on whom. 

and supposest ; Raphael implies 'and art foolish enough to suppose.' 



552 PARADISE LOST. BOOK VIII. 

If Adam who is "to lead" mankind makes such mistakes, how much 
more will his descendants err in their " quaint opinions "? 

90, 91. great.,. bright each used as a noun; cf. 448, 453. 

infers not, is no proof of; see VII. 116. 

93- nor glistering, i.e. "opacous " (23). glistering-, cf. The Merchant 
of Venice, II. 7. 65, "All that glisters is not gold." 

94 97. Contrast ill. 606 12. 

97. his ; a clear case of his for its ; cf. itself, 95. 

99. officious, ministering = Lat. officiosus, ' ready to serve by doing 
officia, i.e. kind acts.' This use of officious in a good sense occurs in 
Titus Andronicus, V. 2. 202. Cf. IX. 104. 

102. "Who hath laid the measures thereof, if thou knowest? or 
who hath stretched the line upon it ? " Job xxxviii. 5, where " it " refers 
to the Earth (verse 4). 

108. numberless, that cannot be described in numbers ; it refers to 
swiftness (cf. 38), not to circles (i.e. the Sun and heavenly bodies). 

no. speed... spiritual, speed such as bodiless spirits use; cf. 37. 

122, 123. the sun... centre', i.e. instead of the Earth (vn. 242, note). 

124. attractive virtue', as we say, 'power of attraction.' So in 
III. 582, 583 he speaks of the constellations being " turned " by the 
Sun's "magnetic beam." 

128. 129. six, i.e. the six planets or 'wanderers ' ; cf. " wandering 
course" (126). The six meant are the Moon, Mercury, Venus, Mars, 
Jupiter and Saturn. The " seventh " planet is the Sun, according to 
the Ptolemaic system ; but the Earth (129), according to the Copernican. 
Shakespeare treats the Sun and Moon as planets. 

129. the planet Earth; he does not mean to state definitely that 
the Earth is a planet ; he only hazards the supposition that she is. See 
the quotation from Burton's Anatomy in the note on 14045. 

130. " The three different motions which the Copernicans attribute 
to the Earth are (i) the diurnal round her own axis ; (2) the annual 
round the Sun ; and (3) the libration, as it is call'd, whereby the Earth 
so proceeds in her orbit, as that her axis is [always] parallel to the axis 
of the World" (Newton). 

The third of these motions is the "trepidation talked," to which M. 
refers in in. 482, 483, and which is there attributed to the Crystalline 
Sphere, in accordance with the Ptolemaic system. Here it is attributed 
to the Earth, as the followers of Copernicus taught. 

One of the points in Paradise Lost which Addison criticises ad- 
versely is Milton's " frequent use of what the learned call Technical 
Words, or terms of art," and he instances more particularly the 
astronomical terms. But Dante had set the example. 



NOTES. 553 

131 40. 'You must attribute the three motions just mentioned 
either to several spheres moving in opposite directions and crossing each 
other obliquely (the Ptolemaic view), or to the Earth (the Copernican 
view). If you attribute them to the Earth, then you save the Sun his 
labour, i.e. of revolving round the Earth; and you also get rid of 
("save") that wheel or "rhomb" called the Primutn Mobile, the 
motion of which is supposed to cause the revolution of the nine inner 
spheres round the Earth in twenty-four hours. It is only a theory that 
this wheel or "rhomb" exists, because it is too far off to be visible; 
and you need not believe in the theory, if the Earth revolves on her 
axis from west to east every twenty-four hours, and thus illuminates 
with the Sun's rays one-half of her globe while the other half, being 
turned away from ("averse") the Sun, is covered with darkness. The 
theory of the Primum Mobile was only invented to explain certain 
motions which really may be due to the Earth. ' 

132. thwart, crossing ; cf. the verb thwart =' to go across,' iv. 557. 

134. nocturnal and diurnal rhomb ; alluding to its revolution in 
twenty-four hours. "Wheel of day and night" at once varies and 
explains the whole phrase, rhomb, wheel, Gk. p6*3os. " Wheel or 
wheels... throughout the Paradiso is used for the revolving heavens" 
("Temple" edition of Paradiso, p. 12). Cf. "the eternal wheels" 
(eterne rote], I. 64; see also xin. 12, xxn. 119. Pope borrowed 
Dante's phrase, in the same sense ; cf. the Moral Essays, ill. 168. 
Sir Thomas Browne in one of his bold astronomical metaphors compares 
the " encyclopaedic and round of knowledge" with "the great and 
exemplary wheels of heaven "-(Vulgar Errors, " To the Reader "). 

137. fetch day, i.e. from the Sun. 

140 45. Cf. Burton, "If the Earth move, it is a Planet, and 
shines to them in the Moon, and to the other Planetary inhabitants, as the 
Moon and they do to us upon the Earth ; but shine she doth, as Galilie 
[Galileo], Kepler, and others prove, and then^r consequens, the rest of 
the Planets are inhabited, as well as the Moon" (Anatomy of Melancholy, 
ninth ed., I. p. 385). He had previously (p. 383) referred to " that 
paradox of the Earth's motion, now (? 1621) so much in question." Some 
theologians found support for it iJob ix. 6. The idea that the stars are 
inhabited is satirised by Bunyan, as a contemporary delusion or im- 
posture, in the introductory lines (" To the Reader ") to The Holy War. 

145. M. seems to have thought that the Moon is inhabited. Cf. 
III. 459 62. Drummond mentions, but refrains from expressing any 
opinion about, the belief ; cf. A Cypress Grove : " Some affirm there is 
another world of men and sensitive creatures, with cities and . palaces, 
in the moon" (Works, II. 250). her spots; see V. 419, 420. 



554 PARADISE LOST. BOOK VIII. 

148. other suns. "He seems to mean Jupiter and Saturn, whose 
satellites had been discovered by Galileo. Though he knew them to be 
planets, he might have regarded them as suns with respect to their 
attendant moons " ; so Keightley, followed by other editors, explains. 
But Burton, speaking of the " Fixed Stars," says : " If our world [i.e. 
the Earth] be small, why may we not suppose a plurality of worlds, 
those infinite stars visible in the Firmament to be so many Suns, to 
have likewise their subordinate planets? which some have held, and 
some still maintain.... Kepler (I confess) will by no means admit that 
the fixed stars should be so many Suns, with their compassing planets" 
{Anatomy of Melancholy, I. 386). That appears to me to be the 
theory to which M. alludes. 

150. male, original direct light; female, reflected light; cf. 
" borrowed," in. 730. 

153 58. 'That there should be such a vast unpeopled space, 
only made for the purpose of shining, and from each of its orbs only 
contributing (so great is the distance) a mere glimpse of light to 
this Earth which itself sends back light : this notion is open to 
dispute. ' 

157. this habitable, the Earth ; an imitation of the Greek phrase 
77 olKovufrr] (777), ' the inhabited world.' 

159. i.e. whether the Copernican system or the Ptolemaic be 
right. 

163 66. It was objected to the Copernican theory "that if the 
Earth mov'd round on her axle in twenty-four hours, we should be 
sensible of the rapidity and violence of the motion." M. has this 
objection in mind when he suggests that if the Earth does revolve, her 
motion may be smooth and even, and that the atmosphere may move as 
well as the Earth which would, of course, make the sense of motion 
less perceptible to us (Newton). 

164. inoffensive, not striking against anything, not colliding 
(Lat. inqffensus}. spinning, i.e. like a top. 

173. Cf. Wordsworth's Ode to Duty, 53, 54 : 

"Give unto me, made lowly wise, 
The spirit of self-sacrifice." 

181. Intelligence; in Spenser "a frequent term for the celestial 
beings " (Todd). See the Hymne of Heavenly Beautie, 84, and cf. 
Drummond, A Cypress Grove : "And if these [the "eternal habitation 
and throne " of the Almighty] be so dazzling, what is the sight of Him, 
for whom and by whom all was created ; of whose glory to behold the 
thousand thousand part, the most pure intelligences are fully satiate, 
and with wonder and delight rest amazed ; for the beauty of His light 



NOTES. 555 

and the light of His beauty are uncomprehensible" (Works, n. 277). 
It is really a Dante word ; cf. the Convivio, ill. vi. 

!83 97. Some editors regard these lines as an objection against 
study of the difficult problems of physical science. I think rather that 
Milton protested against barren speculation of all sorts, and a spirit of 
excessive enquiry in general ; cf. n. 558 69, note. 

194, 195. what is more, i.e. anything beyond that, fume, vanity; 
literally 'smoke' (L,a.t. fumus). fond, foolish, impertinence, irrelevance, 
that which does not belong to or concern us. 

197. still to seek, always deficient, at a loss. See Comus, 366, note, 
and cf. the Utopia (Pitt Press ed., p. 131), "They do daylie practise... 
lest they should be to seek in the feate of arms," i.e. deficient in 
skill. 

205. Raphael says later (229 46), that he was not acquainted 
with the story of Adam's creation, and mentions the reason why. The 
poet naturally varies the speakers. 

212. palm-tree, i.e. the date-palm. 

213. from labour, i.e. when I come from = 'after' (Gk. ec). 
218. " Grace is poured into thy lips," Psalm xlv. 2. 

225. fellow-servant, so the Angel described himself to St John, 
Revelation xxii. 9, "I am thy fellow-servant, and of thy brethren the 
prophets." 

229. that day, viz. the sixth of Creation (vn. 519 50). 

230. uncouth, unfamiliar, strange. 

241. barricadoed, fortified. Sin, who kept the gates of Hell, after- 
wards opened them " with ease " to let Satan out, but was unable to 
close them again (11. 871 89). 

243, 244. noise, i.e. of the outcast Angels, who for nine days after 
their fall from Heaven lay prostrate on the lake of fire in Hell 
(i. 5053). When they arose and had re-formed their scattered ranks 
then (i. 66679) 

" Highly they raged 

Against the Highest, and fierce with grasped arms 
Clashed on their sounding shields the din of war, 
Hurling defiance toward the vault of Heaven." 

Those were the sounds of " furious rage " heard by Raphael. Addison 
compares Vergil, &neid VI. 55258. 

246. Sabbath-evening', the evening before the Sabbath or seventh 
day on which the Almighty rested from all His work (vir. 592, 593). 
7.47. relation, report, story; cf. Fr. relation and the verb relate. 
251. i.e. who was ever conscious of being created? For the idiom 
cf. v. 857, 858, and see ix. 792, note. 



556 PARADISE LOST. BOOK VIII. 

260. thitherward. See VII. 506 10, note. 

266. fragrance-, perhaps used figuratively to express an intense 
sweetness of feeling. But I think that it refers literally to the sweet- 
scented air, and is combined by a sort of zeugma with joy ; cf. I. 502, 
"flown with insolence and wine" (a similar combination of the literal 
cause with the abstract). 

268. went, walked ; a common Shakespearian use. Cf. The 
Tempest, ill. 2. 21, 22, ''We'll not rw...Nor go neither." 

269. as. The Second Edition prints and. 

281. from whom I have that, to whom I owe it that; cf. Acts 
xvii. 28. 

284. drew air ; cf. t-Kiv TOV atpa (in rather late Greek writers). 
Cf. vil. 14. 

29294. dream... fancy, see v. 100 13 (the passage on 
dreams). 

stood at my head; Keightley quotes Iliad n. 56 59. There is a 
vague suggestion of Penseroso, 147 50. 

29699. See vn. 535, note. 

302. smooth sliding; an epithet of the river Mincius in Lycidas, 86. 

303. M. always describes the " garden of bliss," i.e. Paradise, as 
situate on the level summit of a lofty hill, the steep slopes of which are 
covered with trees and shrubs (cf. " woody "). It is a plateau or table- 
land of circular shape (304). See iv. 134 (note), 172 77. 

plain, flat (Fr. plain, ' level,' Lat. planus). Cf. A Midsummer- Nights 
Dream, in. 2. 404, "Follow me. ..to plainer ground." 

316. submiss, cast down, prostrate (submissus). In writing a letter 
to "your superior," says Ben Jonson, "for your interest or favour 
with him, you are to be the shorter or longer, more familiar or submiss, 
as he will afford you time " (Discoveries, cxxvi.). 

319 33. Genesis ii. 15 17. See vil. 46. 

323. The inverted word-order gives great emphasis, operation, effect. 

330. die, be subject to death. 

331. mortal', cf. Sir Thomas Browne, Religio Medici, I. xxxiii., 
"before his fall, man also was immortal." Many of the Fathers of the 
Church taught the doctrine that Adam, if he had not sinned, would not 
have died but been translated to Heaven. M. speaks doubtfully on the 
subject (v. 493 505), and in The Christian Doctrine, i. 8, says, "it is 
evident that God, at least after the fall of man, limited human life to 
a certain term " which implies that this limitation may have preceded 
the Fall. 

337. purpose, discourse ; cf. IV. 337. reneived', intransitive. 
338 41. Genesis i. 28. See vn. 530 34. 



NOTES. 557 

343> 344- Cf. vil. 493. fealty, M. scans it as three syllables, 
fealty, cf. IX. 262. Contrast Richard II. v. 2. 45, "And lasting 
fealty to the new made king." 

351. stooped, stooping. 

352 54. M. says in The Christian Doctrine, I. 7 (ad fin.}: 
" Man being formed after the image of God, it followed as a necessary 
consequence that he should be endued with natural wisdom, holiness, 
and righteousness.... Certainly without extraordinary wisdom he could 
not have given names to the whole animal creation with such siidden 
intelligence.' 1 '' Cf. too his Tetrachordon : " Adam, who had the wisdom 
given him to know all creatures, and to name them according to their 
properties, no doubt but had the gift to discern perfectly that which 
concerned him much more ; and to apprehend at first sight the true 
fitness of that consort which God provided him" (P. W. ill. 336). See 
Bacon, The Advancement of Learning, I. 3. 3, and 6. 6 ; Dryden, The 
Hind and the Panther, I. 308 10. 

apprehension, perception; cf. Hamlet, II. 2. 319, "What a piece of 
work is a man !...in apprehension how like a god!" So also in 
Henry V. ill. 7. 145. 

37 2 373- The magic ring mentioned in the story of Cambuscan 
( Penseroso, 109 15) enabled its owner to understand the language 
of birds; see The Squyeres Tale, 138 57. Clouston says, "many 
Asiatic tales turn upon a knowledge of the language of birds and 
beasts" (Popular Tales, vol. I. p. 376) e.g. the story in the Arabian 
Nights of "The Page who feigned to know the Speech of Birds." 

379. Cf. Abraham's words, Genesis xviii. 30. 

384. sort, prove fitting, suit; cf. x. 651, P. R. I. 200. 

387. Hume explains : " the one intense ; man high, wound up, and 
strain 'd to nobler understanding, and of more lofty faculty, the other 
still remiss ; the animal let down, and slacker, grovelling in more low 
and mean perceptions. 

"A musical metaphor [cf. 384], from strings, of which the stretch'd 
and highest gave a smart and sharp sound, the slack a flat and heavy 
one." Lat. remissus =' slack, relaxed.' 

The construction of the line is absolute 'the one being intense' etc. 

388. The subject of the verbs is which (= " society "), in 385. 
390. participate; cf. IX. 717. 

396. converse, have fellowship with; cf. 418 (" conversation "), and 
vn. 9. 

399. nice, dainty ; said with a touch of reproof to Adam for being 
fastidious and " subtle " in his tastes. 

402. in pleasure, in the midst of pleasant things. Eden means 
' pleasure ' ; cf. iv. 27, 28. 



558 PARADISE LOST. BOOK VIII. 

405 407. Passages like this, and in. 383, 384, v. 603 606, 
reveal the Arianism of Milton's theology. 

407. Newton quotes Horace, Odes I. i. 17, 18 : 
unde nil majus generatur ipso, 
nee viget quicquam simile aut secundum. 

409. and those ; the Heavenly beings. 

412 14. An allusion to Romans xi. 33. 

417. in degree, only relatively perfect, the cause, which thing, 
viz. his imperfection, is the cause. 

421. through all numbers absolute. Newton noted that this is a 
Latin turn of phrase = * perfect in every respect'; from Lat. numerus in 
the sense 'a part of a whole, detail.' Cf. omnibus numeris =- l n every 
detail' in the following passages : perfectum expktumque omnibus 
suis numeris atque partibus Cicero, De Natura Deorum II. 13; and 
liber numeris omnibus absolutus Pliny, Epistles IX. 38. Here M. uses 
the Latinism with a kind of quibble, numbers being in antithesis to one. 
For absolute'" perfect,' cf. 548. 

423. his single imperfection, his imperfection in being single, 
i.e. unwedded. Cf. phrases in Shakespeare like "single blessedness" = 
blessedness in being single, A Midsummer-Night's Dream, I. i. 78; 
cf. I. 1 20, note. 

425. in unity defective, defective as long as he is single, unity ; in 
its literal sense, * oneness, the state of being one.' 

which, a thing which, viz. " to manifest... and beget." 

433. from prone, from being prone, i.e. not upright. M. uses 
this classical idiom several times in prose and verse, but commonly 
with the preposition of. Cf. The Tenure of Kings, " raised them to 
be high and rich of poor and base" (P. W. n. 47). See iv. 153, note. 

440. fret. "Milton is, upon all occasions, a strenuous advocate 
for the freedom of the human mind, against the narrow and rigid 
notions of the Calvinists of that age " (Thyer). 

441. my image ; in apposition to thee (440) ; cf. vil. 519, 520. 
443. freely, spontaneously ; without warning from his Maker. 
445. Genesis ii. 18. 

450. other self; so in X. 1 28. Cf. the classical phrases for a friend, 
e?T6>os auros and alter ego. 

45286. Genesis ii. 21, 22. 

460, 461. the cell of fancy, for this idea cf. v. 102 109. See 
Numbers xxiv. 4 (" falling into a trance, but having his eyes open "). 

462, 463. abstract, abstracted In Gen. ii. 21, the word rendered 
11 a deep sleep " implies a ' trance ' (Newton). 

465. my left side. " The Scripture says only ' one of his ribs,' but 
Milton follows those interpreters who suppose this rib was taken from 



NOTES. 559 

the left side, as being nearer to the heart " (Newton). Cf. cordial, 
' belonging to the heart ' (Lat. cor), in 466. Sir Thomas Browne, 
Religio Medici^ I. xxi., says, "Whether Eve was framed out of the left 
side of Adam, I dispute not ; because I stand not yet assured which 
is the right side of a man ; or whether there be any such distinction in 
nature." See also x. 886 88, notes. 

466 70. In his Tetrachordon, M. says : ' * That there was a 
nearer alliance between Adam and Eve, than could be ever after 
between man and wife, is visible to any. For no other woman was ever 
moulded out of her husband's rib" (P. W. III. 335). 

478. Cf. Milton's Sonnet " On his deceased Wife," 14 (Thyer). 

488. Newton quotes Shakespeare, Troilus and Cressida, iv. 4. 120, 
" The lustre in your eye, heaven in your cheek." 

494. enviest, grudgest. 

494 99. Genesis ii. 23, 24; Matthew xix. 4 6; Mark x. 6 8. 

498, adhere=he Scriptural word "cleave" (Genesis ii. 24). 
Newton notes that the Vulgate has adharebit uxori suee. 

500. divinely, by divine agency (cf. 485) ; Lat. divinitiis. Cf. 
S. A. 226, " The work to which I was divinely called." 

502. conscience, consciousness = Lat. cotiscientia cf. Hebrews x. 2, 
"because that the worshippers once purged should have had no more 
conscience of sins." So in the second Sonnet ("To Cyriack Skinner") 
on his blindness. 

503. wooed... won. Proverbial; cf. Richard III. i. 2. 228, 229: 

" Was ever woman in this humour woo'd ? 
Was ever woman in this humour won ? " 

See i Henry VL v. 3. 77, 78 ; Titus Andronicus, n. i. 82, 83 ; 
Sonnet 41. 

504. not obvious, retiring, modest; not 'forward.' 

508. honour. Cf. Hebrews xiii. 4, " Marriage is honourable in 
all," and the Prayer-Book, "holy Matrimony... is an honourable 
estate." Cf. 577. 

513, 514. This notion of omens is imitated from the classical 
poets. Cf. ix. 78284. 

5i5 : 17- gales. Speaking of the similar passage in bk. IV. cf. 
"sylvan scene" (iv. 140), "gentle gales" (156) Tennyson justly re- 
marked : " undoubtedly commonplace now, but M. introduced the 
style": which the i8th century poets did to death. 

518. the amorous bird of night ', see V. 39 41, note. 

519, 520. Cf. XI. 588, 589. The evening-star Hesperus was also 
called stella Veneris. See vn. 366, note, on his kill-top ; Newton 
compares Catullus LXII. i, i ; Vergil, Eclogues vm. 30. 



560 PARADISE LOST. BOOK VIII. 

532, 533- Cf. S. A. 10031007. 
534 36. or. ..or', cf. Coriolanus, III. i. 208, 209: 
" Or let us stand to our authority, 

Or let us lose it"; 
VQ& Julius Ccesar, V. 5. 3, "he is or ta'en or slain." 

537 39. So in S. A. 1025 30 the Chorus ask why women are 
fickle: 

"Is it for that such outward ornament 
Was lavished on their sex, that inward gifts 
Were left for haste unfinished, judgment scant, 
Capacity not raised to apprehend 
Or value what is best, 

In choice, but oftest to affect the wrong ? " 

In those lines, as here in 540 42, we have Milton's own opinion as to 
the relative character and intellectual capacity of man and woman. 
"Not equal" is his view (iv. 296); contrast Tennyson's "diverse" 
(The Princess). 

547. absolute, perfect, " complete " (548). Cf. 471 74. 

548. so -well to know, i.e. she seems (547). 

555> 556- i-e- designed by God from the first, not made to supply 
some need or " occasion " that arose afterwards. 

560. contracted, frowning, in sign of displeasure. Cicero has 
contrahere frontem in this sense, Pro Cluentio 26. 

561 78. Cf. the very similar passage in bk. X. (145 56), where, 
after the Fall, Adam is rebuked by God for having yielded to Eve 
(Genesis iii. 12) and eaten the forbidden fruit. Raphael's warning 
prepares us for Adam's weakness in book IX. 

569. Ephesians v. 28, 29. Cf. the Prayer-Book, " I take thee to 
my wedded wife... to love and to cherish." 

570. not thy subjection', a favourite sentiment with M. ; cf. IX. 
118286, S. A. 105360. 

573. that skill, that knowledge or wisdom, i.e. self-esteem. 

574. " The head of the woman is the man," i Corinthians xi. 3. 
576. adorn. The word is either an imitation of Ital. adorno = 

adornato, and M. is fond of Italianised forms; or an instance of the 
Elizabethan tendency to abbreviate participles. 

579> 8o. touch. Cf. Adam's words, 530. 

590. hath his seat in reason, is based on. Compare Dante's 
analysis of love into two kinds " either natural or rational " (amore 
o naturale o d" animo} Purgatorio, XVII. 92, 93. That and the next 
canto of the Purgatorio should be compared with 586 621. The 
language recalls Twelfth Night, II. 4. 21, 22 : 



NOTES. 56l 

" It gives a very echo to the seat 
Where Love is throned." 

591. scale, ladder (Lat. scala); cf. V. 483, and Sir Thomas 
Browne, Religio Medici, I. xxxiii., " there is in this universe a stair, 
or manifest scale, of creatures, rising not disorderly, or in confusion, 
but with a comely method and proportion." He speaks too of " the 
ladder and scale of creatures " (l. xxx.). See also Bacon, New Atlantis, 
Pitt Press ed., p. 47. This idea of ascent is essentially Platonic and 
Spenserian. 

592. We find this idea of Heavenly love in Comus, 1003 n 
(the allegory of Cupid and Pysche), Lycidas, 176, 177, and Milton's 
Latin elegy, the Epitaphium Damonis, 217. Note also that in the 
first three drafts of his contemplated drama of Paradise Lost a personi- 
fication of "Heavenly Love" appears among the characters. No 
doubt, the idea was suggested by Plato's discourse in the Symposium 
(180 et seq.) on the two types of love ovpdvios "E>ws, 'divine love,' 
and irdv5rifji.os "Epws; cf. Milton's reference to "the divine volumes 
of Plato" (by which probably he meant in particular the Symposium 
and PJuzdrus) in a well-known passage of autobiography in An 
Apology for Smectymnuus, P. W. ill. 119. Spenser has An Hymne 
of Heavenly Love, the sentiment of which is Christianised Platonism, 
adapted from Italian sources ; see the Pitt Press edition of the Fowre 
Hymnes. 

thou may^st ascend. Cf. Wordsworth, Laodamia, 145 47 : 
"Learn by a mortal yearning to ascend, 
Seeking a higher object : Love was given, 
Encouraged, sanctioned, chiefly for that end." 
Thyer refers to the Symposium 211. 

598. genial, nuptial ; cf. Lat. genialis lectus (or torus] ; genialis is 
connected with gignere, 'to beget, to produce, bring forth.' See IV. 712. 

599. mysterious , full of awe, such as befits "a great mystery" 
(Ephesians v. 32). 

601. decencies, graceful traits, touches of comeliness. 

604. Cf. the definition of friendship as ' one soul in two bodies.' 

607. these subject not, these do not bring me into "subjection" 
(570); i.e. the charming qualities of Eve mentioned above. 

608. foiled, overcome. 

609 1 1. i.e. though he meets with various objects presented to him 
by his senses under various forms, yet he still preserves freedom of choice. 
615. Cf. Wordsworth, Laodamia, 97, 98 : 

" He spake of love, such love as spirits feel 
In worlds whose course is equable and pure." 

P. L. 36 



562 PARADISE LOST. BOOK IX. 

624, 625. Cf. the description of spiritual forms in I. 42428. 

631. Earth 's green Cape, Cape Verd ( = 'green'), on the west 
coast of Africa, verdant Isles, the Cape Verd islands ; commonly 
identified with the classical Hesperidutu Insula, in which were the 
" Hesperian Gardens " (in. 568) where grew the golden apples guarded 
by the daughters of Hesperus and the dragon Ladon. See in. 568, 
iv. 250, notes. 

632. I think the rhythm shows that Hesperean qualifies sun (630), 
not Isles. 

633 43- Raphael "very properly closes his discourse with those 
moral instructions which should make the most lasting impression on 
the mind of Adam, and to deliver which was the principal end and 
design of the Angel's coming " (Newton). 

634. See i John v. 3, " For this is the love of God, that we keep his 
commandments." 

636. free will, your will unswayed by passion. 

637. admit, approve of. Newton says 'commit' ( = Lat. admittere). 
639. persevering', cf. vil. 632. 

648. See vn. 41, note. 

65 1 good, propitious, gracious : sis bonus, o, felixque tuis, Vergil, 
Eclogue v. 65. Milton had echoed that passage twice. Cf. the end 
(207, 208) of his Epitaphium Damonis : 

quin tu, cali post jura recepta, 
Dexter ades placidusque fave ; 
and Lycidas, 182 85 : 

"Now, Lycidas, the shepherds weep no more; 
Henceforth thou art the Genius of the shore, 
In thy large recompense, and shalt be good 
To all that wander in that perilous flood." 

oft return. Raphael does not appear again in the poem; after the 
Temptation and Fall, a sterner Archangel (XI. 234, 235) is sent from 
Heaven to lead Adam forth from Paradise. 



BOOK IX. 

I 5. This introduction refers mainly to Raphael's colloquy with 
Adam in the four preceding books of Paradise Lost* We were told in 
them how the Archangel came down to Eden, partook with Adam of 
the "rural repast" which Eve prepared (v. 331 450), and then held 
long "talk" with him; narrating the rebellion of Satan and his 



NOTES. 563 

followers (v. 577907), the contest and their expulsion from Heaven 
(vi. i 892), and the Creation of the World (book vii.) ; explaining 
other points on which Adam asks questions (book vni.) ; and ad- 
monishing him against his Enemy (vi. 900 12, vm. 635 43). 
Raphael is referred to several times in books v. vm. as Adam's 
"Angel-guest" (v. 328), "godlike guest" (v. 351), " Heavenly guest " 
(vii. 69, VIII. 646), and it is to him that the description in lines 2 4 is 
meant to apply. 

This book " has more story in it, and is fuller of incidents, than any 
other in the whole poem " (Addison). 

1. no more of talk, i.e. there will be no more of this friendly con- 
versation in the rest of the poem. In book XI. the Messenger sent from 
Heaven is not Raphael "the affable Archangel" (vii. 41), but the 
stern, warlike Michael, who has to announce to Adam and Eve their 
banishment from Eden and to lead them forth. 

where Gad; understand from what follows some words like ''con- 
versed,' * spoke. ' The reference is to book vm., where Adam says that 
the Almighty gave him possession of the Garden of Eden, warned him 
not to touch the Tree of Knowledge (vm. 31633), and then promised 
him a help-mate in Eve (vm. 437 51). 

2. as with his friend. Cf. Exodus xxxiii. n. 

6. tragic, i.e. "notes," to which the nouns "distrust," "breach" 
etc. are in apposition. The style of books IX. xii. is less epical ; we 
must not "expect such lofty images and descriptions as before" 
(Newton). 

11. a world of, much of, a deal of. For the verbal quibble see 
648, and cf. XI. 627. Addison quotes this line (n) to illustrate his 
remark that M. " often affects a kind of jingle in his words " a figure 
of speech, he adds, authorised by "some of the greatest ancients" but 
"at present [1712] universally exploded by all the masters of polite 
writing." 

12. Sin. ..Death; see X. 230. shadow, inseparable companion; 
compare " shade," x. 249. There is in both cases an allusion to the 
description of Death's appearance "that shadow seemed," n. 669; 
"the meagre Shadow," x. 264. 

Misery, all kinds of physical pain and disease the "harbingers," 
i.e. forerunners, of death. Cf. the vision revealed to Adam in XI. 477 
90 of the " diseases dire " that Eve's disobedience brought upon men. 

13 19. He means that as regards the "argument," i.e. subject, 
with which it is now about to deal, his poem has an advantage over 
the three great classical epics : (i) the Iliad, which commences with 
the line " Sing, O Muse, the wrath of Achilles," and describes in book 

36-2 



564 PARADISE LOST. BOOK IX. 

XXII. his pursuit of Hector ("his foe") thrice round the wall of Troy ; 
(2) the Odyssey^ which relates the wanderings that Odysseus ("the 
Greek ") experienced on his homeward journey after the Trojan war 
because Neptune was hostile to him ; and (3) the sEneid, which tells 
of the hostility of Juno to Eneas, the son of Cytherea, i.e. Venus, and 
of his betrothal to Lavinia (daughter of Latinus, king of Latium), who 
had previously been promised in marriage to Turnus. 

There is a similar summary of the themes of the three classical epics 
in his Second Defence of the People of England , where he writes : " The 
epic poet who adheres at all to the rules of that species of composition 
does not profess to describe the whole life of the hero whom he 
celebrates, but only some particular action of his life, as the resentment 
of Achilles at Troy, the return of Ulysses, or the coming of ^Eneas into 
Italy," P. W. I. 299. It is remarkable, I think, how much more 
repetition of thought and expression there is in Milton than in Shake- 
speare. 

This claim to moral, not artistic, superiority, as of Christianity over 
Paganism, occurs in the two other great passages of invocation in 
Paradise Lost cf. I. 12 16 and vn. i 12. In Milton's view the 
great poet is a teacher in the first place, a singer in the second, and 
he seems to have regarded himself as literally an inspired teacher. 

"Wrath" (14), "rage" (16) "ire" (18) all point back to "anger" 
in line 10. " The anger that he is about to sing is an ' argument ' more 
heroic not only than the anger of men, of Achilles and Turnus, but than 
that even of the gods, of Neptune and Juno. The anger of the true 
God is a more noble subject than [the anger] of the false gods" 
(Newton). 

20. answerable a style corresponding with the dignity of his 
subject. 

21. my celestial patroness, i.e. the "Heavenly Muse" (Urania) 
whose aid he invokes at the beginning of the poem (i. 6). Milton's 
references to this Muse of Sacred Song which gave him inspiration 
have a reality that is lacking in the conventional poetical appeals to 
the ' Muses.' Cf. P. R. i. 817. 

22. nightly ; cf. 47. He elsewhere speaks of himself as best 
inspired at night or just at dawn ; cf. ill. 29 32 and VII. 28 30. 

These personal touches have been condemned by some critics as 
alien from the impersonal elevation of epic poetry. " I cannot " (says 
Newton) "but own that an author is generally guilty of an unpardon- 
able self-love, when he lays aside his subject to descant upon his own 
person. But that human frailty is to be forgiven in Milton ; nay, I am 
pleased with it. He gratifies the curiosity he has raised in me about 



NOTES. 565 

his person ; when I admire the author I desire to know something of 
the man ; and he, whom all readers would be glad to know, is allowed 
to speak for himself. But this, however, is a very dangerous example 
for a genius of an infirm order, and is only to be justified by success." 

24. The inverted stress (" easy ") in the first foot gives an easy 
flow of rhythm corresponding with the sense. 

25. since first, i.e. about 1640; some lines of Paradise Lost (iv. 
32 41) were written as early as 1642. 

this subject for heroic song. See the Appendix, pp. 690, 691. 

26. long choosing and beginning late ; see the Introduction. 

29. i.e. the chief mastery being to etc. dissect referring to the 
detailed descriptions of wounds in Homer and Vergil. 

30, 31. fabled... feigned. A mythical subject would not appeal to 
M. Probably one of his reasons for abandoning the story of King 
Arthur, which he at one time intended to take as the subject of his great 
poem, was that he found the story to be " fabled " and " feigned." His 
three great poems all had a solid basis ; so had Lycidas, and perhaps 
Comus in a minor degree (see Introductions to them). 

33. races and games. The allusion is to the classical poets ; cf. 
especially the description of the games in Iliad xxm. and j*Eneid v. 
M. makes the Angels who keep guard over the entrance to Paradise 
"exercise heroic games" (iv. 551, 552), but does not describe them, to 
avoid repetition of II. 528 38. Compare Johnson's comment : " There 
is perhaps no poem, of the same length [as Paradise Lost], from which 
so little can be taken without apparent mutilation. Here are no funeral 
games, nor is there any long description of a shield " such as Homer's 
description of the shield of Achilles, and Vergil's of the shield of 
.^Eneas. Cf. line 34. 

34 38. The allusion is to the Italian poets e.g. Boiardo, Ariosto 
and Tasso and Spenser, who describe tournaments and scenes of 
chivalry. 

34, 35. tilting furniture, all the equipments of a tournament. 
imblazoned, with coats of arms portrayed on them. Such descriptions 
are a great feature of Boiardo's Orlando (Thyer). impresses, devices 
on shields ; the word was particularly associated with the heraldic 
aspect of tournaments. 

36. The base was a skirt or kilt, reaching from the waist to the 
knees, worn by a knight on horseback. 

tinsel trappings ; Keightley quotes The Faerie Queene, ill. I. 15: 
" Her garments all were wrought of beaten gold, 
And all her steed with tinsell trappings shone." 

37, 38. " The marshal placed the guests according to their rank 



566 PARADISE LOST. BOOK IX. 

and saw that they were properly served ; the sewer marched in before 
the meats, and arranged them on the table ; the seneshal was the house- 
hold steward " (Todd). 

41, 43. me. . . remains = me manet. 

43, 44. to raise that name, i.e. to raise up, create, for my poem the 
title "heroic." 

44. an age too late', i.e. in the world's history; implying that the 
conditions favourable to epic poetry had passed away. It is, I 
suppose, true that no great epic poem (unless Tennyson's Idylls of the 
King be an exception) has been written, at any rate in English, since 
Paradise Lost. 

In his Life of Milton Johnson says : " There prevailed in his time an 
opinion that the world was in its decay.... It was suspected that the 
whole creation languished, that neither trees nor animals had the height 
or bulk of their predecessors, and that everything was daily sinking by 
gradual diminution. Milton appears to suspect that souls partake of 
the general degeneracy, and is not without some fear that his book is 
to be written in 'an age too late' for heroic poesy." 

The opinion to which Johnson refers (satirically, as might be 
expected) " is said to have been first propagated by Dr Gabriel 
Goodman, Bishop of Gloucester, in a work entitled 'The Fall of 
Man, or the Corruption of Nature proved by Natural Reason,' 1616" 
(C. H. Firth). Ben Jonson seems to allude to it in his Discoveries, XX. 
(Natura Non Effoeta) : "I cannot think Nature is so spent and decayed 
that she can bring forth nothing worth her former years. She is always 
the same, like herself; and when she collects her strength, is abler still. 
Men are decayed, and studies : She is not." The idea is glanced at by 
Thomson, Spring, 307, 308. ^ 

44, 45. or cold climate. Here he touches on what was a lifelong 
opinion. Thus in his poem Mansus (1638) he apologises for his Latin 
poems on the ground that his Muse was reared in the chill north ; 
while in the History of Britain he complains that the English lack 
"the sun [which] ripens wits as well as fruits " (P. W. v. 240). We 
find the same idea in The Reason of Church Government, Preface to 
book II. (" if there be nothing adverse in our climate, or the fate of 
this age" i.e. adverse to the composition of a great poem), and in the 
Areopagitica ; see P. IV. II. 53, 479. Cf. Pope's Essay on Criticism, 
II., where he says that some people allow only foreign writers to have wit : 
" Meanly they seek the blessing to confine, 
And force that sun but on a part to shine, 
Which not alone the southern wit sublimes, 
But ripens spirits in cold northern climes." 



NOTES. 567 

The influence of climate on national character is a leading idea in 
Gray's philosophic fragment The Alliance of Education and Govern- 
ment. 

or years ; perhaps not far short of sixty. 

During the years that he was engaged over P. L. Milton could only 
compose freely between the autumn equinox and May: "whatever he 
attempted at other times was never to his satisfaction, though he courted 
his fancy never so much" (Phillips's Memoir, 1694, substantiated by 
Toland and Aubrey). 

wing', his favourite emblem; cf. III. 13, VII. 4. 

46. depressed '; used proleptically, and with an antithesis to 
"raise," 43. 

53. The close of the fourth book describes how Satan was driven 
out of Eden by Gabriel. In the intervening books, v. viil., there is 
very little advance in the action of the poem, except that Adam receives 
warning of his Enemy through Raphael. 

54, 55. At his first entrance into Eden Satan had overheard Adam 
and Eve speaking about the Tree of Knowledge and thus learned the 
one thing in which to tempt them and compass their ruin (iv. 408 

535)- 

fraud; in the general sense 'deceit, guile'; see 89, 285. Cf. The 
Prayer-Book, " Whatsoever hath been decayed by the fraud and malice 
of the devil " (the Collect in " The Visitation of the Sick "). 

56. maitgre. Milton uses it in two other places (ill. 255) and 
P.R. in. 368, in each instance with a noun, not a clause. 

59. from compassing the Earth. Cf. Job i. 7, " And the LORD 
said unto Satan, Whence ' comest thou? Then Satan answered the 
LORD, and said, From going to and fro in the earth, and from walking 
up and down in it." 

Todd quotes from Sylvester's Du Bartas, where the passage is 
versified thus: 

" I come, said he, from walking in and out, 
And compassing the earthlie ball about." 

cautious of 'day ; cf. "he rode with darkness," 63, 64. 

60 62. Cf. iv. 549 88, where Uriel is described as coming to 
warn Gabriel, who guarded the eastern gate of Paradise with Cheru- 
bim, that one of the outcast evil angels has found his way into the 
"garden." 

Uriel', cf. in. 648, 649, note. 

descried; this favours the change of text in IV. 567. 

63 66. First he gives an astronomical, then a geographical (76 
82), account of Satan's wanderings. 



568 PARADISE LOST. BOOK IX. 

"Of the seven days during which Satan went round and round 
the Earth, always keeping himself on its dark side, three were spent 
in moving from east to west on the equatorial line; four in moving 
round from pole to pole, [i.e.] from north to south and back, 
in which second way of moving he would traverse (or go along) the 
two colures, viz. two great circles, so named by astronomers, drawn 
from the poles. Originally all great circles passing through the poles 
were called colures (:6Xoupot, 'curtailed'); but the term was at length 
confined to the two great circles drawn from the poles through the 
equinoxes and the solstices respectively. The one was called the 
Equinoctial colure, the other the Solstitial" (Masson). 

67. the coast averse, the side of Paradise away from the gate where 
the Cherubim kept watch (iv. 542 54) ; that this was the north side 
is shown, as Keightley noted, by the position assigned to the river (the 
Tigris) in IV. 223 32. 

69 73. He identifies the Tigris with the river that "went out of 
Eden to water the garden," Genesis ii. 10. 

71 77. Paradise... Eden ; see the notes on iv. 132, 134. 

73. rose up. We have the same rhythm expressing the same effect 
in I. 10 and iv. 229. 

74. sunk the incorrect form used by M., presumably as more 
euphonious ; similarly he nearly always has siing for sang. 

76 82. " The Fiend, on leaving Eden, had gone northward over 
the Pontus Euxinus or Black Sea, and over the Palus Maeotis or Sea of 
Azof, and so still northward, over what is now Russian territory, as far 
as beyond the Siberian river Ob or Obe, which flows into the Arctic 
sea ; whence, continuing round the pole and descending on the other 
side of the globe, he had gone southward again as far as the Antarctic 
sea and pole. So much for his travels north and south. In length, 
i.e. measured as longitude in an equatorial direction, his journeys had 
extended from the Syrian river Orontes, west of Eden, to the Isthmus 
of Darien, and so still west, completing the great circle [of the world] 
to India on the east of Eden. Observe how true to the imagined 
reality is the mention of Ganges here before Indus. In the circuit 
described Satan would come upon the Ganges first " (Masson). 

77. pool, i.e. inland sea; used in allusion to its classical name, 
i) Mcuums invti, Palus Mceotis. So in P. R. iv. 79 he calls it ' ' the 
Tauric pool" (from the neighbouring Tauric Chersonese, i.e. the 
Crimea). Cf. "the Asphaltic pool" = the Dead Sea, I. 411. The 
river Ob is mentioned several times in Milton's History of Moscovia 
(i.e. Russia), one of his minor prose-works, not published till 
1682. 



NOTES. 569 

79. antarctic^ south. "No particular place is mentioned near the 
South pole, there being [there] all sea or land unknown " (Newton). 

8 1. Darien, i.e. the Isthmus of Panama. 

82. the orb, the whole world or bis terrarum. A similar passage 
comes in Milton's Latin piece In Quintum Novembris (7 10), written 
many years before. 

83. narrow, careful, scrutinising closely. 

86. "Now the Serpent was more subtil than any beast of the field 
which the LORD God had made," Genesis iii. i. Cf. 560. 

87, 88. irresolute of thoughts revolved, i.e. a debate that for a long 
time came to no decision in regard to no settlement ofthe thoughts 
pondered over, sentence, decision, Lat. sententia. 

90. suggestions, temptations. 

95. doubt, suspicion. 

98. The alliteration emphasises the intensity of his emotion. 

99. Cf. vn. 328, 329. 

103. M. is fond of comparing the motions of the stellar bodies 
( = " other heavens ") to a " dance " ; cf. v. 178, 620 24, vin. 125. 

104. officious cf. VIII. 99. 

105. as seems. Cf. vin. 15 38, where dealing with the same 
thought M. makes Adam use the same cautious language e.g. " that 
seem," 19, "for aught appears," 30. Probably his reason was that 
he thought that some of the heavenly bodies, especially the Moon, 
might be inhabited (in. 459 62, vin. 140 76). 

107. sacred', used in reference to "light "; see 192, note. 

113. growth, sense, reason. "The three kinds of life rising as it 
were by steps ['gradual,' 112], the vegetable, animal and rational; of 
all which Man partakes, and he only ; he grows as plants... he lives as 
all other animated creatures, but is over and above indued with reason " 
(Richardson). See note on v. 469. 

115. joy in aught. One joy is left to him, but only one (477 

79)- 

119. place ; implying 'fit place to dwell in.' 

" Place or refuge " is not, at first sight, an obvious antithesis, and 
Bentley suggested "place ^refuge." But the sense Milton intended 
is, no doubt : * I find none of these delightful places, or parts of the 
earth, permitted to be a residence for me ; neither can I possibly 
escape from that hell to which I am doomed ' the hell, namely, of 
his outcast condition and "torment" within him (Dunster). 

122. Cf. iv. 109, no. There, as here, Milton makes Satan 
soliloquise on the brink of a momentous action, and the effect is to 
heighten the sense of tension and expectancy. 



50 PARADISE LOST. BOOK IX. 

126 28. For the sentiment, see vi. 907, note. 

130. him destroyed; see vn. 142. 

133. follow, i.e. fall, like man himself; cf. X. 651, note. 

r 37 39- Meant as a sneer at the time which the work of creation 
had taken its Creator, though "Almighty styled." 

140 51. Cf. the "Argument" of bk. vn. : " Raphael... relates... 
that God, after the expelling of Satan and his Angels out of Heaven, 
declared His pleasure to create another World, and other creatures to 
dwell therein." 

140. in one night ; that in which the rebellion in Heaven began ; 
see v. 642 71. 

141. well nigh half; see II. 692, note. 

" That a greater number of angels remained in heaven, than fell 
from it, the Schoolmen will tell us ; that the number of blessed souls 
will not come short of that vast number of fallen spirits, we have 
the favourable calculation of others " (Browne, Christian Morals, III. 
xxviii.). 

142. name', cf. Lat. nomen in the sense 'race, stock.' 

146, 147. if they... are his created ; which he denies when address- 
ing his followers, v. 859 63, telling them that they are "self- begot, 
self-raised," 860. Yet he knew and elsewhere (iv. 42, 43) admitted 
to himself the truth. 

148 51. Cf. Satan's words at his first sight of Adam and Eve 
(iv. 35860). 

150. Bunyan uses original= * origin ' several times in The Holy 
War, e.g. "We will, if you please, first discourse of the original of this 
Diabolus" ("Temple" edition, p. 12). 

155. "For he shall give his angels charge over thee, to keep thee 
in all thy ways, " Psalm xci. 1 1 . 

156. flaming ministers, the Cherubim (61, 62) ; cf. IV. 797, 798. 

157. earthy ; so the original editions ; the mis-reading earthly occurs 
often in modern texts. 

166. this essence, i.e. the substance variously described as "ethereal" 
and "empyreal" of which M. conceived the Angelic forms to consist; 
cf. passages like I. 117, v. 499, vi. 330, 433, and the discourse on 
Angels in The Christian Doctrine, I. 7. Alter their rebellion the 
"liquid texture" (vi. 348) of the forms of the evil Angels degenerated 
into a "gross" substance (vi. 661). See v. 478, vi. 327, notes. That 
the forms of the fallen Angels changed was a doctrine taught by many 
of the Church Fathers. 

to incarnate and imbrute ; the construction is probably varied thus : 
'I am now constrained into a beast, and to incarnate this essence.' 



NOTES. 



571 



169. down; for this use of the adverb as a verb ('sink') Newton 
compares 2 Henry IV. iv. 5, 120, 121. 

170. obnoxious; in the sense of Lat. obnoxius, 'liable, exposed to.' 
172. Cf. iv. 17, 18. 

174. higher, i.e. aiming higher, against the Almighty himself. 

175 78. Jealousy is one of the motives that animate Satan against 
man, but the strongest is desire "to spite the great Creator" (n. 384, 
385). Cf. 178 and x. i, "the... despiteful act." 

176. son of despite; modelled on Hebraic phrases like "sons of 
valour," 2 Samuel ii. 7 (margin), "sons of Belial," i Samuel ii. 12. 

180. like a... mist  the simile is used again, xn. 629 31. It is 
Homeric (Iliad I. 359). The external world had been " like a mist " to 
the poet himself. 

192. whenas, when; so whereas, where; both are common in 
Elizabethan writers, and may perhaps have been originally rather more 
emphatic than the simple forms, though the distinction, if it existed, was 
soon lost. 

sacred; because "God is light," i John i. 5. Cf. the invocation 
("Hail, holy Light") in III. i 6. 

193, 194. The origin of Gray's line, Elegy, 17 : 

"The breezy call of incense-breathing Morn." 

196, 197. Cf. passages like Genesis viii. 21, Leviticus i. 9. 

198, 199. Cf. their "Morning Hymn," v. 153 208. 

200. Newton aptly notes that M. himself was an early riser, quoting 
the passage to that effect in An Apology for Smectymnuus, P. W. III. 112. 
Cf. L? Allegro, 41 68,  Penseroso, 121 30. Among the Milton MSS. 
(a Common-place Book of miscellaneous jottings) found at Netherby Hall 
in Cumberland and printed by the Camden Society was a piece of Latin 
verse in praise of early rising. Aubrey in his brief Life of Milton says 
that it was his custom to rise at 4. 30 a.m., and that he always began the 
day by having the Hebrew Bible read to him: "then he contemplated." 

213. hear ; so the First Ed. ; the Second, bear. 

218. spring, clump, thicket ; commonly ' a sprig, single shoot of a 
tree as in Venus and Adonis, 656, "This canker that eats up Love's 
tender spring." 

228. compare ; used as a noun in in. 138, v. 467 ; so in Shakespeare. 

229. motioned, proposed; cf. motion 'proposal' in politics. 

233. to study household good. Cf. S. A. 1046 49. Milton 
brought up his daughters on this principle. Apparently he had good 
reason to be satisfied in this respect with his third wife, "a genteel 
person," says Aubrey, "of a peaceful and agreeable humour," who, 
according to tradition, was careful "in providing such dishes" as he 
liked best. 



572 PARADISE LOST. BOOK IX. 

241. not the lowest end, i.e. the highest object, since "without love 
no happiness," as Raphael tells Adam (vin. 621). 

245. wilderness, wildness; Todd compares Measure for Measure, 
in. i. 142 (evidently a favourite scene with Milton cf. II. 180 82, 
note). 

247. Scan converse ; cf. 909. So in Hamlet, n. i. 42. 

249. Cf. Cicero's saying which has become proverbial, nunqtiam 
minus solus qttam cum solus  and the familiar lines in Childe Harold, 
iv., "There is a pleasure" etc. 

The verse is noticeable as having two extra syllables. Cf. 

VIII. 2l6. 

264. envy ; cf. IV. 502, .503. 

265. or this, or worse ; whether this, or worse, be his design (261). 
265, 266. The creation of Eve (Genesis ii. 21, 22) is described in 

vni. 465 71. Cf. the allusion in 1153, JI 54' 

270. virgin, sinless, innocent. 

276. the parting Angel, Raphael, whose last words to Adam were 
a warning to "beware" and "stand fast" in his obedience (vm. 

633-43)- 

282. thoufear^st not. " Adam had not said so expressly, but had 
implied as much in enlarging particularly upon [their Enemy's] 'sly 
assault,' 256" (Newton). 

288. thoughts which ; the abrupt transition to the interrogative 
form "how found they?" marks the agitation of the speaker. 

harbour, dwelling-place, lodging; cf. 2 Henry VI. III. i. 335, 336: 
"Let pale-faced fear keep with the mean-born man, 
And find no harbour in a royal heart." 

290. healing words ; again in S.A. 605. 

292. entire ; in the literal sense of Lat. integer (from which entire 
is derived), 'untouched by, free from.' 

314. unite, i.e. with the virtues implied in the preceding lines. 

320. less attributed to, too little credit given to. less, i.e. than 
she deserved. Apparently M. scanned Attributed ; cf. vin. 12. 

327. only our foe  she quotes Adam's argument (296 99), and 
then (329) endeavours to answer it. 

330. front, brow, forehead (Lat. frons) ; used with quibbling allu- 
sion to "affronts" in 328. 

334. event, issue, result, Lat. eventus ; cf. 405, 984. 

336. alone ; emphatic. ' What is the value of these qualities till 
they have been tested and stood the test by their own unaided merits?' 

The sentiment is that of the fine passage in the Areopagitica where 
M. says, " I cannot praise a fugitive and cloistered virtue," i.e. one that 
does not go out into the world and face evil (P. W. II. 68). 



NOTES. 573 

341. no Eden, i.e. "no place of happiness, not what its name 
denotes," i.e. 'pleasure' (Keightley). 

35 X > 35 2 but God left free the will. On this point, as might be 
expected, M. dwells often ; cf. in. 96 128, v. 52440, x. 9. There 
is much bearing on the subject in chapters 3 and 4 on "The divine 
Decrees" and " Predestination "of The Christian Doctrine, i. 

what obeys reason is free ; cf. xii. 82 101. 

353. still erect, always on the alert. 

358. mind, remind. 

361. suborned, procured for an evil purpose ; qualifying object. 

367. approve, give proof of, demonstrate; cf. 2 Cor. vii. ir. 

371. securer, less on our guard, "less prepared" (381). 

' It may be (says Adam) that if we remain together and let the trial 
come to us, instead of going to meet it, we shall not be so well pre- 
pared for it when it does come as you appear to be after my warning : 
if you think so, then go.' 

372 75. The rapid, rather abrupt style is meant, apparently, to 
indicate some displeasure on the part of Adam. 

Newton thought that Milton here had in mind the incident of his 
own wife's leaving him soon after their marriage. 

377. i.e. for all her submissiveness she has the last word. It is in 
these side-touches that M. shows his own estimate of women. Indeed 
the picture he draws of Eve in this book is not agreeable. She is 
self-willed ; easily flattered by the Serpent ; disobedient of command 
(780, 781); selfish enough to drag down Adam in her fall (831); 
deceitful (877, 878); and so mean-spirited as to reproach him (1155 
61). 

387. Oread, a nymph of the mountain (Gk. epos, a 'mountain'). 
Dryad, a nymph of the wood literally of the trees (Gk. Spvs, an ' oak' or 
any tree). Delia, Artemis or Diana, who was born in the island of 
Delos ; the goddess of the chase, in which capacity she was attended by 
a "train" of nymphs. Milton refers to her in Comus, 441, 442, as 

"the huntress Dian... 
Fair silver-shafted queen for ever chaste." 

392. The conception of fire and its uses occurs to Adam later 
(x. 1070 82). 

39395' Pales, a Roman divinity of flocks and shepherds. 
Pomona, the goddess of fruit (Lat. pomum} ; cf. v. 378. The story of 
Pomona's being wooed by Vertumnus, one of the lesser rustic deities of 
Roman mythology, is told by Ovid in the Metamorphoses xiv. 623 et seq. 

likest; misprinted likeliest in the Second Ed. Newton restored 
the true reading. 



574 PARADISE LOST. BOOK IX. 

395> 396- Ceres ) the goddess of agriculture, yet virgin of, i.e. 
before she had become the mother of Proserpine by Jupiter. 

Proserpina, the Latin form; cf. "the Gardin of Proserpina" in The 
Faerie Queene, u. 7. 53. In iv. 269 Milton uses the Englished form 
Proserpin. 

On the appositeness of the comparisons in 386 96 Pearce has an 
excellent note. "She [Eve] was likened to the Nymphs and Delia in 
regard to her gait ; but now that Milton has mentioned her being 
'armed with garden tools,' he beautifully compares her to Pales, 
Pomona, and Ceres, all three Goddesses like to each other [and to Eve] 
in these circumstances, that they were handsome, that they presided 
over gardening and cultivation of ground, and that they are usually 
described by the ancient poets as carrying tools of gardening or hus- 
bandry in their hands." 

401, 402. i.e. to be returned and to have all things, etc. ; an instance 
of zeugma, 

409. hellish rancour imminent ; his favourite word-order ; cf. 5, 
1047, an( i see the note on I. 733. 

413. mere serpent. No doubt, M. knew, and perhaps wished to 
brush aside, the Rabbinical gloss that Satan assumed a form half 
angelical (or human), half serpentine, when he appeared to Eve. Cf. 
Pope, Prologue to the Satires, 330, 331 (part of the bitterly satirical 
portrait of Lord Hervey cf. IV. 800, note) : 

"Eve's tempter thus the rabbins have exprest, 

A Cherub's face, a reptile all the rest." 
See Mark Pattison's note on the passage. 

418. more pleasant, i.e. especially pleasant. 

419. tendance, that which they tended ; the abstract word being 
used in a concrete sense, as often in M. 

423. to, agreeably to, in harmony with. Cf. S. A. 1539, " An( l to 
our wish I see one hither speeding," i.e. just as we wanted. 
426. bushing ; there is no authority for blushing. 
432. Repeated from IV. 270. 
436. voluble ; in the literal sense of Lat. volubilis^ rolling.' 

438. imbordered, planted so as to form a border on either side of 
the "walk" (434). hand, handiwork. 

439, 44- There is a fuller allusion to the legend of the ' Garden of 
Adonis' in Comus, 9981002. No doubt, M. knew the long description 
of the ' Garden' in The Faerie Queene, III. 6. 29 49, which Keats in turn 
followed in Endymion, n. The allusion is not uncommon in Elizabethan 
writers. Cf. Ben Jonson, Cynthia's Revels, v. 3, "I pray thee, light 
honey-bee, remember that thou art not now in Adonis' garden, but in 



NOTES. 575 

Cynthia's presence, where thorns lie in garrison about the roses"; and 
Giles Fletcher, Christ's Victorie on Earth, 40, " Adonis' garden was to 
this but vayne." The chief classical authority for the legend is Pliny, 
Natural History xix. 19, where the gardens of Adonis and Alcinous are 
mentioned in the same sentence. 

revived, i.e. after he was slain by the boar. According to the myth, 
the prayers of Aphrodite (Venus) moved the gods of the lower world to 
allow Adonis to return to the earth every year and pass six months 
with the goddess. Spenser treats the story as an allegory of the im- 
mortality of love, and says (The Faerie Queene, in. 6. 4648) that after 
his restoration to life Aphrodite would not let Adonis descend to the 
nether world but kept him in the ' Garden' : 

"There yet, some say, in secret he does ly, 
Lapped in flowres and pretious spycery, 
By her hid from the world, and from the skill 
Of Stygian Gods, which doe her love envy." 

440. renowned, i.e. through Homer's mention of him. 

441. Alcinous; see the note on v. 340, 341, and compare the 
allusion to Alcinous in Milton's Vacation Exercise, 49 ("In solemn 
songs at King Alcinous' feast"). Laertes" 1 son, Odysseus. 

442. 443. Referring to the Garden of Solomon ("the sapient king") 
mentioned in the Song of Solomon vi. 2. By "fair Egyptian spouse" 
M. means "Pharaoh's daughter" (i Kings iii. i), to whom the Song 
alludes in vii. i ("O prince's daughter"). Some critics regard the 
Song of Solomon as an epithalamium on Solomon's marriage with this 
princess. Addison could "not but take notice, that Milton, in the 
conferences between Adam and Eve, had his eye very frequently upon 
the book of Canticles" (i.e. Song of Solomon). See v. 17 25, note. 

not mystic. M. inserts these words as the allusion is to Scripture 
not as before, to classical legend. Contrast "feigned," 439. 

445 54. Perhaps " only a narrative of what befell the poet in his 
younger days, when living in his father's house in Bread Street, in the 
City" (Keightley). Cf. the seventh of his Latin Elegies, where, speaking 
of his youth, M. says : 

Et modo qua nostri spatiantur in urbe Quirites 

et modo villarum proxima rura placent : 
lines which Cowper renders : 

"I shunned not, therefore, public haunts, but strayed 

Careless in city, or suburban shade." 

Probably the "public haunt" specially meant was Gray's-Inn Walk, 
then the fashionable promenade, and not far from Milton's home. 

No one can read Milton's works carefully without seeing that he 



576 PARADISE LOST. BOOK IX. 

was a true lover of Nature, though not minutely accurate, like Tennyson, 
in his descriptions of her. His favourite season was spring, and his 
favourite times of the day the very early morning (cf. 200, note, and 
447) and twilight (see IV. 598, 599). And, like his contemporaries, 
Cowley and Marvell, he loved a garden ( Penseroso, 49, 50). "He 
always had a garden where he lived," says Aubrey. At his ideal 
College, gardening is to be part of the course. Gardens, indeed, 
were becoming the fashion : witness Evelyn and his Sylva. 

In On Education M. does not forget the influence of Nature : "in 
those vernal seasons of the year when the air is calm and pleasant, it 
were an injury and sullenness against nature, not to go out and see her 
riches, and partake in her rejoicing with heaven and earth." 

445. Editors note that "in populous cities" occurs in Othello, 1. 1. 77. 
See also Drummond's Pastoral Elegy, 83 (Works, n. 116). 

446. annoy, make noisome, pollute. 

450. tedded, mown and spread out to dry. Thomson, who imitated 
M. much, has the word in his Summer, " Wide flies the tedded grain," 
i.e. the corn-sheaves are scattered to dry. 

453. for her, because of her. 

456. plat, plot. 

467, 468. Cf. the sentiment of the famous lines, I. 254, 255. 

471. recollects', in the literal sense 're-collects,' i.e. gathers together 
again ; cf. I. 528. 

" '476 78. i.e. not hope of enjoying pleasure but hope of destroying 
all pleasure, save such as lies in the work itself of destroying. 

485. of terrestrial mould, i.e. "formed of earth" (149), a "man of 
clay" (176). mould ' material, substance'; as often in M. 

489. Cf. Tennyson's description of Helen of Troy in A Dream of 
Fair Women : 

" A daughter of the gods, divinely tall, 
And most divinely fair." 

490, 491. i.e. love and beauty inspire a certain awe unless there 
is a still stronger influence of hate to counteract them. 

not approached, i.e. if not ; the metaphor is continued in "way" 
and "tend" ( = 'direct my course'), 493. 

496. indented', "going in and out like the teeth of a saw," says 
Newton, who refers to the snake in As You Like It, IV. 3. 113, that 
"with indented glides did slip away." 

500. Todd aptly quotes the description of Pyrrhus in the Player's 
speech in Hamlet (li. 2. 485), "with eyes like carbuncles," i.e. deep 
red (a sign of passionate temperament and anger). See Julius Caesar, 
I. i. 186, Coriolanus, v. i. 63, 64, and Kenilworth, xxn. Cf. Dante's 



NOTES. 577 

description of Cerberus: "his eyes are red" (gli occhi ha vermigli} 
Inferno, vi. 16. See VII. 496. 

502. spires t coils; Lat. spira t 'a coil, wreath.' Cf. The Rape of 
the Lock, iv. 43, 44 : 

"Now glaring fiends, and snakes on rolling spires, 
Pale spectres, gaping tombs, and purple fires." 

505, 506. "He here enumerates all the transformed serpents of 
which antiquity had told, viz. those into which Cadmus and his wife 
Harmonia were changed in Illyria ; that which accompanied the Roman 
ambassadors from Epidaurus to Rome ; and those which were regarded 
as the sires of Alexander the Great and of Scipio Africanus ; of which 
the former ['he'] was said to have been Jupiter Ammon, the latter 
Jupiter Capitolinus" (Keightley). 

not those that... changed, i.e. not those serpents that changed into 
themselves Hermione and Cadmus. This interpretation Keightley's 
seems the best ; but some editors insert a comma after changed, taking it in- 
transitively and treating Hermione and Cadmus as in apposition to those. 

Hermione ; the name usually given is Harmonia. The story how 
Cadmus king of Thebes and his wife Harmonia came to Illyria and 
were changed into serpents is told by Ovid in the Metamorphoses IV. 
562 602 ; a passage which M. seems to have had again in his mind 
when he described the final change of Satan, X. 511 32. The 
Metamorphoses was one of Milton's favourite books, according to his 
daughter's statement (see Johnson's Life) ; just as, in Golding's transla- 
tion, it seems to have been a favourite with Shakespeare the source, 
probably, of much of his knowledge of classical mythology. 

506, 507. the god, vEsculapius, the god of medicine, whose chief seat 
of worship was at Epidaurus. At the time of a great pestilence at Rome 
the oracle of Delphi bade the Romans seek the aid of ^Esculapius j so 
they sent ambassadors to Epidaurus and the god appeared to them in 
the form of a serpent which accompanied them back and stayed the 
pestilence at Rome, where ^Esculapius was thenceforth worshipped. 
This legend also is told by Ovid, Metamorphoses XV. 622 744. 

507 10. nor to which, i.e. nor those serpents into which Jupiter 
Ammon was changed and was seen (i.e. by mortals). 

The story that Jupiter Ammon the "Libyan Jove," IV. 277, so 
called in allusion to his shrine in the Libyan desert was the father of 
Alexander the Great occurs in Plutarch's Life of Alexander. Dryden 
uses it, with obvious reference to this passage, in Alexander's Feast, 
2129. A similar fable represented Jupiter Capitolinus (i.e. of the 
Capitol) as the father of Scipio Africanus, the vanquisher of Hannibal. 
Olympias ; the wife of Philip of Macedon. 



P. L. 



37 



578 PARADISE LOST. BOOK IX. 

516. so ; his habitual way of completing a simile. The comparison 
of a ship with a serpent is not peculiar to any poet. 

522. An allusion to the legend of the sorceress Circe who bewitched 
men with magic drugs, and then by a touch of her wand transformed 
them into animals (cf. "herd disguised") which she kept in subjection. 
Cf. the account in Odyssey x. how Odysseus came to the island of JExa. 
where she dwelt, and how she changed some of his followers into swine. 
Milton represents Comus as the son of Circe and assigns to him the 
attributes of the enchantress. See Comus, 50 77. In Eikonoklastes, 
13, M. says that part of the nation is still bewitched with the 
idea of monarchy, "like men enchanted with the Circean cup of 
servitude." 

525. turret, towering, enamelled, smooth and variegated like 
enamel. Perhaps M. recollected A Midsummer- Nights Dream, n. i. 
255, "And there the snake throws her enamell'd skin" (i.e. throws off, 
casts). 

5 2 9> 530- i-e- either he actually used the serpent's tongue as an 
instrument of speech (although "not made" for it, 749), or he caused a 
voice to sound by impression of the air. 

532. This description of the temptation should be compared with 
Eve's account of the dream in which she supposed herself to be 
tempted, v. 3593. 

533. sole wonder; cf. Comus's address to "the Lady" in 
Comus, 265, " Hail, foreign wonder ! " and The Tempest, I. 2. 
426, 427. 

544. shallow to, without sufficient intelligence to ; rather a favourite 
epithet of contempt with M. 

549 550' glozed, spoke flatteringly. . proem, introduction; Gk. 
irpoofyuov , a prelude in music (cf. "tuned"), hence a preface to 
a poem or speech. Todd shows that M. remembered Comus, 
160 64. 

553 66. Milton meets the objection of improbability. Cf. Sir 
Thomas Browne : "It hath seemed strange unto some, she [Eve] should 
be deluded by a serpent, or subject her reason to a beast, which God 
had subjected unto hers. It hath empuzzled the enquiries of others to 
apprehend, and enforced them unto strange conceptions, to make out, 
how without fear or doubt she could discourse with such a creature, 
or hear a serpent speak, without suspicion of imposture," Vulgar 
Errors, I. i. The first two chapters of the Errors (1646) discuss the 
" Causes of Errors," from that of Adam and Eve onwards, and " what 
we may call the intellectual and moral by-play of the situation of 
the first man and woman in Paradise, with strange queries about it " 



NOTES. 579 

(Pater). These chapters are very typical of Browne, and we may be sure 
that Milton knew them. 

558. the latter I demur; 'as to the latter "sense," 554 I am 
doubtful whether it was denied to brutes, for ' etc. Probably this is an 
expression of Milton's own opinion; cf. vin. 373, 374. 

560, 561. i.e. thee I knew to be the subtlest beast ; because Raphael 
had so described the serpent when speaking with Adam and Eve (vii. 

494 495)- 

563. of mute', for this classical idiom cf. 712 and see iv. 153, note. 

575. roving the field ; cf. Comus, 60, ''Roving the Celtic and 
Iberian fields." So "roam" is transitive in I. 521. 

581. fennel; of which serpents were supposed to be fond; cf. 
Pliny, Natural History vin. 41, xix. 56, XX. 95. He mentions the 
belief that fennel causes snakes to cast their old skins. To this associa- 
tion with serpents it may have been due that fennel was an emblem of 
dissembling and flattering : whence Ophelia's offer of fennel (probably) 
to the treacherous Claudius "There's fennel for you" (Hamlet t IV. 5. 
1 80). In An Apology for Smectymnuus M. mentions another popular 
belief, given by Pliny, that connects serpents with fennel: " Something 
I thought it was that made him so quick-sighted... now I know it was 
this equal temper of his affections, that gave him to see clearer than 
any fennel-rubbed serpent" (P. W. in. 136). The snake was thought 
to refresh its sight in spring-time by rubbing against the fennel-plant. 

582. Serpents were supposed to suck the teats of sheep and goats 
(Newton). 

58688. Cf. 740, 741. 

599, 600. to degree of reason, to the extent of giving me the faculty 
of reason, inward; cf. "internal man," 711; externally there was 
no change in him (601). 

601. retained; in somewhat loose agreement with me (599). It is 
a more appropriate word than restrained (Bentley's suggestion). " For 
retained signifies the being kept within such and such bounds in a 
natural state ; restrained, to be kept within them in an unnatural ; but 
the serpent's being confined to his own shape, was being in his natural 
state " (Warburton). 

605. middle, in the air. 

606. fair ; similarly used as a noun by Shakespeare. Cf. Sonnet 
16, "Neither in inward worth nor outward fair," and Love's Labour's 
Lost, IV. i. 17, "Where fair is not, praise cannot mend the brow." 
For the Elizabethan use of an adj. =a noun cf. 483, 986. 

612. universal Dame, mistress (domino) of all. Cf. "Empress of 
this fair World," 568 ; " Queen of this Universe," 684. 

372 



580 PARADISE LOST. BOOK IX. 

613. so talked. " Milton has shown more art and ability in taking 
off the common objections to the Mosaic history of the temptation, by 
the addition of some circumstances of his own invention, than in any 
other theological part of his poem " (Warburton). 

spirited, possessed by a spirit. 

For a more striking instance of the same alliterative effect (j...j), 
designed to suggest the serpent's hiss, see X. 521 28. 

615, 6 1 6. She thinks that in his excessive compliments (cf. 
606 12) he has scarcely shown such "reason" (600) as he said 
that the fruit conferred. 

623. to their provision, to enjoy what is provided for them. 

624. birth) produce 'what she bears' 1 ') birth is from A.S. beran, 
'to bear^ and in the original editions of P. L. the word is here spelt 
hearth. As in the passages where the word occurs in its ordinary sense 
it has its ordinary form, some editors think that M. intended the 
peculiar form hearth to indicate the somewhat peculiar sense, and retain 
the form. The New EnglisJi Dictionary (which does not recognise 
hearth as an independent form) quotes Dryden, Georg. I. 196: 

" The fruitful Earth 
Was free to give her unexacted birth." 

629. blowing) blossoming. The epithet does not occur elsewhere 
in Milton, though the Comus MS., at line 545, suggests that he thought 
it a safer description than flatmting. 

balnt) i.e. the balsam-tree (Gk. 3do-axos), to which "myrrh," a 
kind of thorny shrub, is akin. Cf. v. 23. 

633, 634. Quoted by Burke in his speech on American Taxation, 
in describing General Conway (the leader of the House of Commons) 
after the debate when the Stamp Act was repealed (March 18, 1766). 

ivandei'ingfire) an ignis fatmts ; cf. the German elf-licht. 

634 42. Cf. Burton, Anatomy of Melancholy) " Fiery spirits or 
devils are such as commonly work by blazing Stars, Firedrakes, or Ignes 
Fatui ; which lead men often in flumina, aut pracipitia " (ninth ed. , 
1800, I. 65). The chief of these spirits were Will-o'-the-Wisp and Jack- 
o'-the-Lanthorn. M. alludes to the superstition in L? Allegro* 104 (see 
the note), and Comus, 433 ; but whether he himself believes in it we do 
not know, as he is careful to add the qualifying words "they say." Cf. 
Comns, 43237: 

' ' Some say no evil thing that walks by night, 
In fog or fire) by lake or moorish fen, 

Hath hurtful power o'er true virginity." 
635. compact of ) composed of; cf. Titus Andronicus, V. 3. 88. 



NOTES. 581 

640. M. recollected A Midsummer- Night' 's Dream, n. i. 39, 
"Mislead night-wanderers, laughing at their harm" (said of the mis- 
chievous Puck ; cf. also ill. i. 112). 

643. fraud, offence, crime (Lak. frans) ; or 'hurt, damage.' 

644. the Tree of prohibition ; a "Hebraism for the prohibited or 
forbidden tree " (Newton). 

645. root, source ; used probably with a grim quibble on 
" Tree." 

648. fruitless... fruit', the same sort of jingle or word-quibble as in 
line n ; see the note on i. 642. " The Italian poets... abound with such 
verbal quaintnesses" (Newton). 

653. sole; cf. iv. 421, 433. 

dattghler of his voice ; a literal rendering of a Hebrew phrase which 
implies ' a voice from Heaven.' Wordsworth describes Duty as " Stern 
daughter of the Voice of God," Ode to Duty. 

the rest, for the rest 'in all else' (Lat. cetera}. 

654. Cf. Romans ii. 14, " these. ..are a law unto themselves." 
655 63. Genesis iii. i 3, which M. follows very closely. 

655. guilefully, because he knew that only one tree not "all" 
was forbidden them. 

667. new part puts on, assumes a new character, i.e. feigning 
indignant sympathy with man. The metaphor is that of ' playing a part ' ; 
cf. P. R. n. 239, 240, and Coriolanus, III. 2. 105, 106 : 

" You have put me now to such a part which never 

I shall discharge to the life" (i.e. act). 

As a young man Milton seems to have been fond of the theatre, 
which often supplies him with a simile or illustration ; cf. V Allegro, 
131 34, and his first Latin Elegy. 

668. fluctuates ; used literally ; ' undulates ' (Lat fluctuat} with his 
body, in act, with his whole person addressed to its task ; cf. 674. 

670. some orator-, such as Demosthenes, to whom M. refers in 
P. R. IV. 268 71 ; or Isocrates, the "old man eloquent" of his 
Sonnet (x.) "To the Lady Margaret Ley," and author of the 6yos 
'ApeoirayiTiKds whence the title of the Areopagitica was adapted ; or 
Cicero (cf. 675, note). In P. R. IV. 356 60 he makes the Saviour 
speak of the Prophets of Israel as better teachers of the true principles of 
statesmanship " Than all the oratory of Greece and Rome " (i.e. orators). 

672. since mute, i.e. not merely in Greece and Rome, but altogether, 
as though eloquence were an extinct quality. 

673. in himself collected, i.e. completely master of himself = Ital. 
in se raccolto (Thyer). 

673) 674. each part, motion, each act, the orator's whole form, and 



582 PARADISE LOST. BOOK IX. 

every movement and gesture, won audience cf. the picture of Satan 
addressing his followers, X. 458, 459. 

675. in highth began, plunged right into the subject (in medias res). 
Probably M. had in mind the abrupt commencement of Cicero's first 
Oration against Catiline quonsque tandem abutere, Catilina, patientia 
nostra ? (Thyer). 

680. science', in its original wide sense ' knowledge ' (scientia] ; cf. 
Gray's Elegy, 119, " Fair Science frown'd not on his humble birth." 

681, 682. Cf. Vergil's line felix qui potnit rernm cognoscere causas 
Georg. ii. 490. 

685 712. Genesis iii. 4, 5. Bacon says: "Aspiring to be like 
God in power, the angels transgressed and fell; Ascendant, et ero similis 
altissimo : by aspiring to be like God in knowledge, man transgressed 
and fell ; Eritis sicut Dii, scientes bo mini et malum : but by aspiring to 
a similitude of God in goodness or love, neither man nor angel ever 
transgressed, or shall transgress. For unto that imitation we are called." 
( The Advancement of Learning, II. 22. 15. The two Latin quotations 
are respectively from Isaiah xiv. 14 and Genesis iii. 5, in the Vulgate, 
whence Bacon usually quoted the Scripture.) See VI. 899, note. 

687. to knowledge, i.e. in addition to. 

700. ye ; there is no need to substitute you. Originally ye was 
used for the nominative only and you for the objective cases ; cf. "Ye 
have not chosen me, but I have chosen you," John xv. 16. Elizabethan 
writers, however, often disregarded the distinction. 

701. not feared, i.e. not to be feared. 

702. The Serpent's argument is ' Your fear of death implies 
injustice on the part of God : but if He is "not just," then is He "not 
God," and so not to be feared.' 

710 12. So Adam also reasons ; cf. 932 37. 

710. should', so the original editions; shall, which some modern 
texts print, is obviously due to 708. 

711. internal Afan though externally he is still a serpent; 
cf. 601. 

713, 714. so ye shall die perhaps, i.e. this perhaps will be the 
death meant for you, of which you spoke (663). Cf. the New Testament 
often, e.g. Colossians iii. 9, 10, "ye have put off the old man with his 
deeds, and have put on the new man." 

722. if they, i.e. produce. 

729, 730. can envy dwell etc.; a variation of Vergil's tantane animis 
calestibus irce? Aeneid I. u. So in vi. 788; see also iv. 118, 119. 

732. humane; a complimentary term, 'gracious.' Some editors 
interpret it = ' human' (a bold oxymoron); but it does not bear this 



NOTES. 583 

sense in the two other places where Milton uses it, viz. II. 109, 
P. R. I. 221. 

737. impregned; cf. IV. 500. 

740, 741. Cf. 586 88; v. 84 86. It is an addition to the 
Scriptural account. " They were deceived through the conduct of their 
senses, and by temptations from the object itself" (Sir Thomas Browne). 

ivith desire  cf. Genesis iii. 6, " a tree to be desired." 

742. inclinable ; leaning to, inclined towards (Lat. indinabilis). 

758. in plain; cf. "in few," i.e. words, X. 157. 

771. author, informant, unsuspect, not to be suspected. 

773> 774- ' Being ignorant of good and evil, how can I know what 
is to be feared?' 

781. eat a preterite = ate ; so often in Shakespeare; cf. Macbeth, II. 
4.18. 

782 84. The introduction of " signs " and omens after the manner 
of classical writers occurs at several important points in the action of 
the poem. Cf. 1000 1004; vin. 513,514; xi. 182 207. Similarly 
Grotius in his Adamus Exul represents Eve's disobedient act as 
accompanied by portents arborque trepido tota subsiluit solo. 

Moreover, " all Nature suffered by the guilt of our first parents " 
(see x. 651), so that these signs are not merely prodigies but appropriate 
"marks of her sympathising in the fall of man " (Addison). 

783. The pathetic effect of the alliteration is noticeable ; cf. the 
Nativity Ode, 186. 

792. knew not eating, i.e. that she was eating ; an imitation of the 
Greek use of a participle after verbs of knowledge or perception, as e.g. 
in Euripides, Hecuba 397, otf yap oT5a 5e<T7r6ras fcecr^n^os. The Romans 
borrowed the idiom, as in sensit medios delapsus in hostes (sEneidll. 377). 
So in S. A. 840, "Knowing, as needs I must, by thee betrayed." 

793. boon, gay, cheerful ; cf. ' boon companion.' 

794. The Serpent has slunk away ; she forgets him, in her joy. 

795. "virtuous... precious', equivalent to superlatives. Editors note 
that Ben Jonson in his English Grammar, bk. II. chap. IV., refers to 
this use of the positive, which may have been imitated from the Greek 
and Latin idiom. Editors quote Sia Beduv, Iliad V. 381, and sancte 
deorum, ^Eneid IV. 576. 

797. to sapience, even to the point of conferring wisdom ; cf. 599 
("to degree "). inf anted, without fame, unknown. 

800. not without; cf. V. 178, note. 

803 805. i.e. she intends to eat of the fruit till she equals the 
gods ("others"), however much they may grudge ("envy") her the 
knowledge. 



584 PARADISE LOST. BOOK IX. 

805 807. The Serpent had argued that the tree was not the gift 
of the gods, 718 18. 

experience, making trial. 

811 13. Cf. texts like Psalms x. n, xciv. *j,Job xxii. 13, 14. 

815. safe, not dangerous, not likely to harm; cf. the colloquial 
phrase 'safe out of the way.' Macbeth (ill. 4. 25) asks the murderer 
" But Banquo's safe?" i.e. disposed of, so as not to cause trouble. 

820. odds, balance, advantage ; cf. X. 374. 

823. more equal. Cf. IV. -29599, 63538; VIII. 540 75 ; 
X. 145 56, 888 98 : passages which, taken together, are evidence 
of Milton's own conception of the difference between man and woman. 
There is indeed something curiously personal in the references to woman 
in his poems, as though he could not refrain from expressing his own 
views; cf. 377, note, and 1182 86. 

832, 833. Cf. Horace's tecum vivere amem, tecunt obeam libens 
Odes III. 9. 24. 

837. sciential, conferring knowledge, i.e. on those who partake 
of it. There is a happy allusion to Milton in Lamb's essay Oxford in 
the Long Vacation, where he describes his visits to the libraries : " I 
seem to inhale learning...; and the odour of their [the books'] old 
moth-scented coverings is fragrant as the first bloom of those sciential 
apples which grew amid the happy orchard " (i.e. of Eden). 

845. divine of, foreboding = Lat. divinus in the sense 'prophetic 
of,' as in Horace, Ars Poetica 218, 219, divinafuturi...sententia. 

846. the faltering measure, the tremulous, uneven ' beat ' of his 
heart, excited by the foreboding of evil. 

851. smiled; cf. Lat. ridere in the sense 'to look pleasant.' 

852. The language is Vergilian Georg. IV. 415. 

853. 854. i.e. the pleading expression in her face, showing that she 
was conscious of guilt, served to introduce the apology she was about to 
make. The construction seems to be, 'excuse came as prologue and 
(came) to lead up to apology 'prompt being a verb. The alteration 
"too prompt" (adj.) is tempting, but has no authority. 

864. tasted, if tasted. 

872. to admiration ; cf. Fr. a merveille. 

875. opener mine eyes ; cf. 706 708, 985. 

877 85. A deceitful argument ; contrast her reasoning in 817 25. 

888. The strong medial pause marks Adam's horror. 

890. astonied, astonished ; cf. Job xvii. 8, "Upright men shall be 
astonied at this." horror chill ; cf. Vergilian expressions like gelidtis 
tremor and frigidus horror sEneid II. 120, 121, III. 29. 

899. amiable, lovely, pleasing to the eye; of the five epithets in the 



NOTES. 585 

line it is the one that carries on the notion in " fairest," 896, and " to 
sight," 898. For the use of amiable cf. iv. 250. 

901 . The alliteration seems to emphasise the certainty and hopeless- 
ness of her doom, to death devote ; from Horace's line devota morti 
Pectora libera Odes iv. 14. 18. devote, doomed. 

910. wild. The epithet well marks Adam's distress : even Paradise 
has suddenly lost its beauty in his eyes and become " wild " and dreary. 

914, 915. Cf. vin. 49496. 

922, 923. hast', so the First Ed.; the Second hath. 

The original editions have a comma after dared, with the sense 
'who hast been so daring, had it been only in gazing on the fruit 
covetously.' Some editors remove the comma after dared and make 
the construction dared to eye', a needless change, I think. 

926. 927. Various classical renderings of this obvious sentiment 
have been cited ; the closest being a fragment of the poet Agathon, 
which occurs in Aristotle, Nicom. Ethics vi. 2 : 

fi6vov yap atfrou cai #e6s ffreplffKerat, 
dytvyTa iroieiv eW ftp 77 TTirpa-yfj.va. 

927. so, even so, i.e. though what is done cannot be undone. 

928. perhaps. M. may have in mind the variation between the 
Authorised Version in Gen. iii. 3 (" lest ye die ") and the Vulgate's 
"ne forte moriamini." Cf. Sir Thomas Browne, Vulgar Errors, I. i. 

fact; in the literal sense 'deed,' H,a.t.factum ; cf. 980. 

929. foretasted fruit, the fruit having been tasted already, i.e. "by 
the Serpent." 

932 37. This was the Serpent's argument to Eve ; cf. 710 12. 

945. not well conceived of, i.e. it is not to be supposed that the 
Almighty would act thus. Cf. 938. 

947, 948. lest the Adversary... say. Cf. Deuteronomy xxxii. 27. 
For "the Adversary" = Satan, according to the meaning of the name, 
cf.foo i. 6 (margin), i Peter v. 8. 

953. certain to, resolved to. An imitation of Lat. certus, with 
infinitive or gerund, = ' determined to ' ; cf. certus eundi and certa mori 
&neid IV. 554, 564. 

965. I boast me sprung; cf. the Homeric etxoA'cu elvai. 

967. Cf. vin. 604. 

974. by occasion, indirectly. 

977 81. Contrast 826 33. 

980. oblige; in the sense of Lat. obligare, 'to render liable to 
punishment, make guilty.' 

989. Cf. the proverbial phrase ' to scatter to the winds.' Newton 
compares Horace, Odes i. 26. i 3. 



586 PARADISE LOST. BOOK IX. 

998. not deceived  as Eve was by the Serpent ; Adam sinned wil- 
fully. Cf. i Timothy ii. 14, "And Adam was not deceived, but the 
woman being deceived was in the transgression." 

999. Cf. x. 15153- 

1000 1004. Cf. 782 84, note. 

1003, 1004. It has been remarked that this is the only passage in 
the poem where M. uses the phrase 'Original Sin'; the doctrine ex- 
pressed by it he discusses in the treatise on The Christian Doctrine, I. 
7 and n, attributing the first use of the expression (originate delictum) 
to St Augustine, though it is said to have been used by Cyprian in the 
third century A.D. (P. W. iv. 191 94, -259 61). 

1009. swim, revel; cf. XI. 625. So in The Faerie Queene, I. 12. 41, 
" Yet swimming in that sea of blissful joy," and II. 3. 40. 

ion. Cf. Horace's spcrnit humumfiigientepenna Odes ill. 2. 24. 

1018. elegant', in the sense of Lat. elegans, * refined in taste, 
fastidious.' Cf. v. 335, " tastes... inelegant." 

1019, 1020. " Since we use the word savour in both senses [physical 
and moral], and apply it to the understanding as well as to the palate " 
(Newton). In this rather far-fetched thought M. is really playing upon 
the two senses of Lat. sapere, ' to taste ' and ' to have discernment, be 
wise' both sapience (1018) and savour (through the French) coming from 
sapere. Newton quotes the same quibble from Cicero's De Finibus n. 8, 
nee enim sequitur ul cut cor sapiat ci non sapiat palatum. " Taste," e.g. 
' man of taste,' lends itself to the same sort of word-play. 

1026. for, instead of. 

1034. toy, caress. 

1042. Cf. Proverbs vii. 18. 

1046 52. Contrast the description of Adam's sleep (v. 3 5). 

1050. unkindly, not natural, fumes, vapours, as of intoxication 
(cf. 793) ; cf. Dryden, Aurengzebe : 

" Power like new wine does your weak brain surprise, 
And its mad fumes in hot discourses rise." 

1058. Shame ; personified, as in 1097. In the original editions the 
sense was obscured by the omission of a stop after shame. 

1058, 1059. h* covered', cf. Psalm cix. 29, " Let mine adversaries 
be clothed with shame, and let them cover themselves with their own 
confusion, as with a mantle." 

but his robe uncovered more, i.e. Shame, till then unknown to them 
(iv. 313 1 8), made them conscious of their nakedness. The thought 
is worked out in The Christian Doctrine, I. 12. 

1059 62. Judges xvi. 4 20 ; cf. Samson Agonistes almost pa ssim. 
There is a striking application of the story in the conclusion of The 



NOTES. 587 

Reason of Church Government, n. P. W. n. 506; cf. also the 
allusion in Eikonoklastes, 11. 

the Danite', cf. the description of Samson's father Manoah v& Judges 
xiii. 2, " a man of Zorah, of the family of the Danites," i.e. of the Tribe 
of Dan. 

1061. Some editors have put forward the view that here and in the 
three lines of S. A. where the name occurs M. treated the second 
syllable of Dalilah as short or unaccented, e.g. Dalilah, a scansion which 
seems to me as unpleasant as it is needless. The correct accentuation 
is Dalilah ( Dalilah), and the last two syllables may form a trochee 
or "inversion of rhythm" such as M. admits into any foot of his blank 
verse. Thus the present line, I think, runs 

"Of Phfl|iste|an Dajlilah, | and wak'd," 
the third foot having a light stress or accent. 

The lines in S. A. in which the name comes are : 
"Was in the vale of Sorec, Da|Hla," 229: 
"Than, Da|lila| thy wife," 724 (a short verse): 
"The sumpjtuous Dajlila | floating this way," 1072. 
In each verse the trochee is rhythmical and quite regular. 

' Dalilah ' follows the first syllable of the Greek form ; the form in the 
Authorised Version, ' Delilah,' is nearer to the Hebrew. As printed in 
S. A. the name has no h, perhaps an intentional difference, M. being 
extremely particular where sound was affected. 

1064. s true ken; cf. The Comedy of Errors, I. 2. 45, "The clock 
hath strucken twelve upon the bell." The forms of the preterite and 
past participle of strike vary greatly in Elizabethan English. 

1068. worm, serpent (vil. 476) ; cf. A ntony and Cleopatra, v. 2. 
243, 244, where Cleopatra asks for the asp or serpent to kill herself: 
" Hast thou the pretty worm of Nilus there, 
That kills and pains not ? " 

109. the last, the worst, greatest ; cf. Lat. extremus, ultimus. 

of the first, i.e. lesser evils, which they may well expect, seeing that 
they have already experienced the greatest of evils, viz. shame. 

1080 82. Cf. x. 72225, xi. 315 17. 

1083. this earthly, i.e. shape; or earthly might be a noun = 'mortal 
nature,' as in vm. 453, "My earthly by his Heavenly overpowered." 

1086 88. Cf. iv. 245, 246. 

impenetrable to star. Newton quotes Statius, Thebais x. 85, 86, ntilli 
penetrabilis astro  lucus iners, which perhaps suggested Spenser's 
description of the grove " Not perceable with power of any starr," The 
Faerie Queene, I. i. 7. Cf. Arcades, 88, 89 : 
"Under the shady roof 
Of branching elm star-proof." 



5 88 PARADISE LOST. BOOK IX. 

or sunlight. Cf. poetic descriptions such as "sun-proof" applied to 
shade, e.g. in Peek's play David and Bethsabe : 

"This shade, sun-proof, is yet no shade to me." 
So in Matthew Arnold's Church of Brou : 

"The hills are clothed with pines sun-proof." 
1088. brown, dark, cover me ; cf. Revelation vi. 16. 

1090. them "those Heavenly shapes," 1082. 

1091. as in, seeing that we are in ; Lat. ut ; cf. x. 978. 

noi ii. The reference is to the banyan-tree or Indian fig 
(Fiats religiosa or Indicd). Warton pointed out that M. has followed 
closely cf. the numerous verbal similarities the account of this tree 
in Gerard's Herball, 1 597 (the standard Elizabethan work on botany), 
where it is called "the arched Indian Fig-tree." Gerard, who took 
his information on the subject from Pliny, Natural History xn. 5, says : 

" The ends [of its branches] hang downe, and touch the ground, 
where they take roote and grow in such sort, that those twigs become 
great trees ; and these, being grown" up unto the like greatnesse, 
do cast their branches or twiggy tendrels unto the earth, where they 
likewise take hold and roote ; by meanes whereof it cometh to passe, 
that of one tree is made a great wood or desart of trees, which 
the Indians do use for couerture against the extreme heate of the 
sun. Some likewise use them for pleasure, cutting downe by a 
direct line a long walke, or as it were a vault, through the thickest 
part, from which also they cut certain loopholes or windowes in 
some places, to the end to receiue thereby the fresh cool air that 
entreth thereat, as also for light that they may see their cattell that 
feed thereby.... From which vault or close walke doth rebound such 
an admirable echo or answering voice.... The first or mother of this 
wood is hard to be known from the children." 

The description of the size of the leaves of this tree " broad as 
Amazonian targe," 1 1 1 1 is due to the same source, Gerard reproducing 
Pliny's mis-statement that foliorum latitude peltce effigietn Amazonia* 
habet. The description is inaccurate as the leaves of the banyan are 
small : it is the banana or plantain-tree that has large leaves which 
" are used, on the coast of Malabar, in the same manner , as here by 
Adam and Eve" (Keightley). Pliny in describing the Ficus Indica 
evidently united the characteristics of the banyan and banana, and 
apparently writers even later than M. repeat the confusion. The 
banyan from its peculiar character is described in many early travels, 
e.g. in Sir Thomas Herbert's (1634) and Tavernier's (1684). 

It furnishes Sir Thomas Browne with a characteristic simile : we 
must, he says, "bid early defiance unto mother- vices " (i.e. evil ten- 
dencies which lead to other evil): "Where such plants grow and 



NOTES. 589 

prosper, look for no champain or region void of thorns ; but produc- 
tions like the tree of Goa Ficus Indica, and forests of abomination," 
Christian Morals, m. iv. Thomson (Summer) speaks of 

"the maze, 

Embowering endless, of the Indian fig " ; 
and it is, doubtless, one of his many Miltonic reminiscences. 

1103. Decan ; the name was often applied to the Indian peninsula 
in general, i.e. so as to include Malabar. 

1 1 1 1. Cf. Vergil's reference to the ' crescent-shaped shields ' (lunate 
pelta) of the Amazons, JEneid I. 490. 

1113. Cf. the margin in Genesis iii. 7, "things to gird about." 

1115. of late, i.e. as compared with the remote events of which the 
poem treats ; not strictly " of late " in relation to Milton's own time, 
because the date of Columbus's discovery was 1492. 

1117. ivith feathered cincture. Hence Gray's phrase, "feather- 
cinctur'd chiefs," spoken of the Indians of South America, The Progress 
of Poesy, 62. 

112731. Cf. 35156. 

1140, 1141. Cf. Eve's words, 335. approve ; cf. 367. owe, possess. 

1144. Cf. Homer's iroibv 0-e frros (fujyey HCOS 65bvruv. 

1155. the head. An allusion to i Corinthians xi. 3, "the head of 
the woman is the man." So in iv. 443. 

1 159. Alluding to 37275. 

1163, 1164. the love, i.e. that you have to offer me ; "thy love" is 
a needless change. 

1164, 1165. expressed immutable, shown to be unchangeable ; the 
words refer to Adam's love for Eve, which he had "expressed," i.e. 
demonstrated, so strikingly ; cf. 961, 962. 

u82 86. No doubt, an expression of Milton's own opinion. One 
of his sneers at Charles I. is that he was influenced so by his wife : 
"Examples are not far to seek, how great mischief and dishonour 
hath befallen nations under the government of effeminate and uxorious 
magistrates ; who being themselves governed and overswayed at home 
under a feminine usurpation, cannot but be far short of spirit and 
authority without doors, to govern a whole nation" (Eikonoklastes, 7). 
Professor Firth has recently noted a curious, hitherto unremarked 
illustration of Milton's prejudice against women, viz. his treatment of 
Boadicea in his History of Britain. " Previous historians had regarded 
the warrior-Queen as a national heroine ; he represented her merely as 
a virago, ' a distracted woman with as mad a crew at her heels.' " 

1183. -women', he may have dictated woman. 

1189. contest. For the accent cf. xi. 800. 



590 PARADISE LOST. BOOK X. 



BOOK X. 

i. heinous; cf. IX. 929. despiteful ; see IX. 175 78, note. 
5 7. Contrast IX. 81 1 16. 

9. with. ..free will armed. Cf. 46 and see IX. 351, 352, note. 

10. complete to, fully equipped so as to ; qualifying mind or man. 
Some editors remove the comma of the original editions after armed, 
which they connect with complete. But the rhythm seems to me to 
favour a slight pause at the end of verse 9. 

12. they, i.e. "Mar" (9), used collectively, as in Genesis i. 26. 

16. manifold in sin. "The Divines... reckon up several sins as 
included in this one act of eating the forbidden fruit, namely, pride, 
uxoriousness, wicked curiosity, infidelity, disobedience, etc." (Newton). 
Milton has a passage to this effect in The Christian Doctrine, i. 1 1 
(P. W. iv. 254,255). 

1 8. the Angelic guards, i.e. the Cherubim; cf. ix. 6r, 61, 156, 

157- 

19. by this', cf.Jutius Ccesar, I. 3. 125, "And I do know, by this, 
they stay for me." 

20. 21. had stolen entrance; as is described in IX. 69 76. 
29. i.e. to make appear accountable = to explain, justify. 
accountable ; in the sense ' that can be accounted for ' ; not, as 

more often, 'liable to render account.' 

32. his secret cloud. The description is based on passages like 
Exodus xxxiii. 9, 10; i Kings viii. 10, n ; Ezekiel x. 4: to which (and 
others) M. refers in the chapter, i. 2, of The Christian Doctrine that 
treats Of God." Cf. the fuller allusion in in. 37881. 

33. "And out of the throne proceeded lightnings and thunderings 
and voices," Revelation iv. 5. Where he is describing Heaven M. 
draws largely on the book of Revelation, as we should expect. 

35. charge, duty, office, viz. of guarding Man ; cf. IX. 157. 
38. foretold, having been warned, so lately, see ill. 80 et seq. 
40. speed, be successful in. 
42. flattered', cf. IX. 532 48, 606 12. 
lies', cf. IX. 703709, 71632. 

45. moment, force = Lat. momentum, the metaphor being taken from 
a balance; cf. "inclining" (46), "even scale" (47). So in vi. 239. 
48. rests, remains, Lat. restat; cf. 3 Henry VI. v. 7. 42, 43 : 
"And now what rests but that we spend the time 
- With stately triumphs, mirthful comic shows ?" 



NOTES. 591 

pass, should be pronounced. 

50. presumes... vain ; cf. Adam's words, IX. 927 37. 

52. by some immediate stroke ; see 210. Cf. The Christian Doctrine, 
I. 12, "Under the head of death, in Scripture, all evils whatever, 
together with everything which in its consequences tends to death, must 
be understood as comprehended ; for mere bodily death, as it is called, 
did not follow the sin of Adam on the selfsame day, as God had 
threatened." 

53. The proverbial form of phrase seems hardly to fit the 
context. For the proverb "omittance is no quittance" (i.e. you may 
leave a thing undone, but not have done with it), cf. As You Like It, 
ill. 5. 133. 

54. as bounty, i.e. has been "scorned." Man had shown scorn of 
the gifts of the Almighty by seeking something more which was for- 
bidden him. 

55 57. d. John v. 22, "For the Father judgeth no man, but 
hath committed all judgment unto the Son." 

59. mercy... justice. Cf. Psalm Ixxxv. 10 and see the Nativity Ode, 
14144. 

60. his Mediator. M. discusses " The Mediatorial office " of Christ 
in The Christian Doctrine, i. 15. 

63 67. For similar passages see in. 13842, 383 89, vi. 
680 82, 719 21 ; and cf. Hebrews i. 3, "Who being the brightness 
of his glory, and the express image of his person, ...sat down on the right 
hand of the Majesty on high." Cf. 85, 86. 

70, 71. Cf. in. 168. 

74. when time shall be ; cf. III. 284. 

for so I undertook', as was related in III. 227 65. 

77.. derived, turned aside. Lat. derivare, 'to divert a stream from 
its channel,' hence figuratively, ' to turn aside, divert.' 

77, 78 Todd compares The Merchant of Venice, IV. i. 196, 197. 

79. them ; " Justice " and ' ' Mercy. " 

84. conviction, proving guilty; this is not necessary because the 
Serpent has admitted his own guilt by flight. The line emphasises the 
words "convict by flight" (i.e. convicted). 

86 88. Compare the description of the Son accompanied to the 
gate of Heaven by a host of Angelic beings as he goes forth to create 
the Universe, vn. 192 209. 

88, 89. Cf. vn. 617 25. coast, region; more often plural. 

90, 91. Cf. Raphael's account of his descent from Heaven to 
Paradise, vill. no 14. 

92. The time is determined by Genesis iii. 8 (" in the cool of 



592 PARADISE LOST. BOOK X. 

the day"), where for "cool" the margin has "wind" cf. "gentle 
airs " (93). 

95. more cool, i.e. than " the evening cool": not a very happy play 
on words. 

96. Intercessor. Cf. III. 219, xi. 19. Milton deals with the 
subject of Christ's intercession for man, as one aspect of his office as 
'Mediator,' in The Christian Doctrine, I. 15. 

q>j 223. The whole scene follows Genesis iii. 8 21 closely, the 
words of the Scripture being worked into the text, just as in Shakespeare's 
Roman historical plays the language of North's Plutarch is constantly 
reproduced and in Tennyson's Idylls of the King the language of 
Malory's Morte Darthur. In many passages of the poem, especially 
where he represents the Deity as speaking, M. reproduces the Scripture 
thus, merely adapting it to the form of blank verse. 

1 06. obvious ; in the sense of Lat. obvius, ' coming to meet.' 

112. apparent, clear, manifest. 

1 20. still, ever, always. 

121, 122. Cf. IX. 1051 59, 107098. 

128. my other self. Cf. vin. 450, note. 

131, 132. The lines are suggestive of Lycidas, 6, 7. 

145 56. See IX. 823, note. 

149, 150. See ix. 265, 266 (note), and cf. iv. 440, 441. 

154. i.e. such as were seemly while subject to her husband's 
government. 

J 55> 1 S&' part... person ; terms drawn from the stage. ' It was for 
you to play the part (cf. IX. 667) and character (Lat. persona} of ruler.' 
So in P. R. II. 240. 

157. in few, cf. Henry V. I. 2. 245. So "in plain," ix. 758. 

161. bold; as when she plucked the forbidden fruit (ix. 780, 
781). 

loquacious ; as in her argument with Adam (ix. 973 et seq.). 

165. unable ; qualifying Serpent. 

169. more to know, i.e. that the Serpent was only the instrument of 
Satan. 

173. mysterious, because they had an inner application, viz. to 
Satan, which, for the time, was to be hidden from Adam, who would 
suppose that they referred to the Serpent. Later (1032 35) Adam 
perceives the application. 

judged as then best', an inversion of order ; 'as was then thought best.' 

175 81. Genesis iii. 14, 15. 

181. her seed, i.e. in the person of the Son of Man (183). 

182. then verified. The 'verification' described (183 190) is of 



NOTES. 593 

the last and most significant words of the whole curse, viz. " Her seed 
shall bruise," etc. 

"Here [182 90] is a manifest indication, that, when Milton wrote 
this passage, he thought Paradise was chiefly regained at our Saviour's 
resurrection. This would have been a copious and sublime subject for 
a second poem. The wonders, then to be described, would have 
erected even an ordinary poet's genius; and, in episodes, he might have 
introduced His conception, birth, miracles, and all the history of His 
administration, while on earth. And I much grieve, that, instead of 
this, he should choose for the argument ['subject'] of his 'Paradise 
Regained ' the fourth chapter of Luke, the temptation in the wilderness ; 
a dry, barren, and narrow ground, to build an epick poem on. In that 
work he has amplified his scanty materials to a surprising dignity ; but 
yet, being cramped down by a wrong choice, without the expected 
applause " (Benlley). 

The poet was an old man, and tired, when he set about the 
second epic, and wisely adapted his choice to his strength. 

1 83. Mary, second Em  repeated from V. 387. The thought is similar 
to that which makes Christ " the last Adam," i Corinthians xv. 45. 

184. Cf. I. 45. 

185. Cf. Ephesians ii. 2, " the prince of the power of the air," 
referring to Satan. 

185 90. Based on the following texts : Colossians ii. 15 ; Psalm 
Ixviii. 18; Romans xvi. 20 (marginal reading "tread"). Cf. III. 
24756. 

191. his fatal bruise, i.e. Satan's. 

213. suffer change ; cf. 65 1 , note. 

214. Philippians.^. 

215. John xiii. 5. 

217. slain ; apparently for the purpose, as hitherto it has been 
implied that the beasts were not killed by each other (see 710, note) or 
by Adam. 

218. repaid, i.e. for the loss of their old skin. " Pliny mentions 
some lesser creatures shedding their skins in the manner of snakes, but 
that is hardly authority sufficient for such a notion as this " (Newton). 

219. thought not much; cf. The Tempest, I. 2. 250 53 : 
" Prospero. Dost thou forget 

From what a torment I did free thee? 
Ariel. No. 

Pros. Thou dost, and think'st it much to tread the ooze 

Of the salt deep " (i.e. a great grievance). 
his enemies ; because it was their sin that necessitated His sacrifice. 

P. L. 38 



594 PARADISE LOST. BOOK X. 

222. robe of righteousness  see Isaiah Ixi. 10. 

225. Cf. in. 169, 239, 279. 

229. was sinned and judged; for the impersonal construction cf. 
VI- 335- 

230. Sin and Death. See the notes on II. 648, 650, 666. 
Addison observes that book x. has a "greater variety of characters " 

than any other. He compares it with the last act of a tragedy in 
which all the main dramatis persona are introduced and the effect of 
the action upon them is made clear. Compare especially Adam and 
Eve in their abasement. 

231. in counterview, i.e. opposite each other, one " on either side" 
(li. 649) of the entrance ; vis-a-vis. Cf. 235. 

231, 232. the gates... now... open wide. Cf. the description in II. 
871 89 how Sin, "the Portress of Hell-gate," opened "the infernal 
doors " to let Satan pass out on his journey through Chaos to the new- 
created World and then could not shut them. now, emphatic. 

2 35> 2 36' O Son. See II. 727 814. author, parent. 

241. avengers ; so the Second Ed.; the First Ed. has avenger ; but 
cf. " their revenge," 242. 

246. Cf. 263, 358, 359, and the "Argument" of the book, lines 
6, 7 (" by wondrous sympathy "). 

249. secretest ; cf. Macbeth, in. 4. 126, "the secret'st man of blood." 

thou, my shade, i.e. shadow; cf. ix. 12, note. Sin and Death are 
always introduced together in the poem : an obvious allegory. 

256. found, build ; Lat. fundare, ' to lay the foundation of.' 

257. this main, the "sea"(286) of Chaos ; " the foaming Deep "(301). 
260, 261. " intercourse , passing frequently backward and forward; 

transmigration, quitting Hell once for all to inhabit the new creation ; 
they were uncertain which their lot should be " (Richardson). 

264. meagre; in the literal sense 'lean,' Fr. maigre ; cf. the con- 
ventional representation of Death as a skeleton. 

274. ravenous fowl. "Of vultures particularly it is said by Pliny, 
that they will fly three days beforehand to places where there are future 
carcases triduo antea volare eos ubi cadavera futura sunt [ Nat. Hist. 
X. 7]. And (what probably gave occasion to this similitude in Milton) 
Lucan has described [vil. 831 37] the ravenous birds that followed 
the Roman camps, and scented the battle of Pharsalia" (Newton). Cf. 
Julius Casar, v. i. 8587, where on the morning of the battle Cassius 
says: 

"ravens, crows, and kites 

Fly o'er our heads, and downward look on us, 

As we were sickly prey " (i.e. as if). 



NOTES. 595 

though ; the reading through has no authority. 

279. so cf. ix. 516. Feature, shape, form; as commonly in 
Shakespeare, from the literal meaning make,' O. Fr. faiture, Lat. 
factura. M. purposely uses rather a vague word which leaves much to 
the imagination ; cf. the description of Death in n. 666 70. 

279, 280. Cf. Georgic I. 376, suspiciens patttlis captavit naribus 
auras. 

281. sagacious of, scenting (Lat. sagax). 

282, 283. waste wide; one of Milton's favourite alliterative effects, 
here suggestive of desolation. 

anarchy  cf. vi. 873. In II. 988 Chaos is personified as "the 
Anarch old." 

284 302. Lines 284 88 describe how Sin and Death collected 
towards the mouth of Hell the materials for their causeway : lines 
293 98 how Death made the materials coalesce into solid masses 
suitable for the purposes mentioned in the next verses : lines 299 320 
how the materials were used partly to form the foundation of the whole 
structure, partly to construct the bridge raised on those foundations. 
"Aggregated soil" in 293 and "gathered beach" in 299 refer to the 
"solid" elements mentioned in 286, while "asphaltic slime" in 298 
refers to the "slimy" elements, 286. By " the rest" in 296 he means, 
I think, all such "solid" elements as are not included under "soil" in 
293 : the " slime," i.e. pitch, helps to bind these elements together : the 
"soil " may be conceived as coalescing more easily under the petrifying 
stroke of Death's sceptre. In 29698 the sense obviously is that 
Death bound the elements together by means of his look and by means 
of the slime ; the manner of expression is rather strained, but, as it seems 
to me, quite Miltonic, the combination of an abstract word like "rigour" 
and a literal word like "slime" being somewhat similar to I. 502, 
"flown with insolence and wine." 

288. shoaling  apparently transitive; 'driving it in a shoal or 
bank.' 

290. the Cronian sea, the Arctic Ocean ; from the Lat. name Cro- 
nium Mare (Pliny, Nat. Hist. iv. 30), less used than Mare Concretum. 

291. the imagined way, i.e. the north-east passage, then thought to 
be practicable and made the object of many voyages of discovery to India 
and the East. Cf. a similar allusion in the Areopagitica, "a passage... 
far easier and shorter than an Indian voyage, though it could be sailed 
either by the north of Cataio eastward, or of Canada westward " (i.e. 
even though it could). P. W. II. 69. 

292. Petsora, the Gulf of Petchora in the Arctic Ocean, at the 
mouth of the river of that name. M. speaks of the river " Pechora or 

38-2 



PARADISE LOST. BOOK X. 

Petzora," and of the town of the same name in his History of Moscovia, 
quoting as his authority the narratives of certain merchants of Hull who 
had wintered in those parts in the year 1611. 

292, 293. the...Catkaian coast; commonly explained 'the coast of 
China' with doubtful correctness, however. Strictly 'Cathay' was 
identical with China, Cathay being a corruption of Kitai, the name by 
which China is still known- in Russia and in many Asiatic countries. 
But formerly, till some time after 1600, the opinion prevailed that 
' Cathay ' was a great region distinct from China, lying north of it and 
stretching right up to the Arctic Ocean ; comprehending, in fact, East 
Siberia. Cathay is marked so in many old maps, and its capital was 
supposed to be Cambalu i.e. Cambalu was regarded as a different city 
from Pekin, the capital of China, though properly they were the same. 
I believe that this was Milton's notion of Cathay, from the references to 
it in the History of Moscovia and from the fact that in P. L. xi. 388 and 
390 he treats " Cambalu, seat of Cathaian Can " and " Paquin [Pekin] 
of Sintcan kings " as two distinct cities. 

rich. In the History of Moscovia he touches several times on the 
wealth and trade of the cities of Cathay P. W. v. 407. Indeed the 
wealth of this mysterious land had become proverbial through the 
reports of travellers from the time of Marco Polo onwards. See 
chapter XX. in Mandeville's Voiage. 

294. mace, sceptre; cf. Henry V. IV. i. 278, "The sword, the 
mace, the crown imperial." Todd quotes from the play Dido, Queen 
of Carthage, by Marlowe and Nash, "like pale Death's stony mace" 
(n. i. 1 16, Bullen's ed., II. 320). Burke has a telling allusion to 
this line in the Reflections on the Revolution in France, part II., 
section V. "[he] will sooner thaw the eternal ice of his atlantic 
regions, than restore the central heat to Paris, whilst it remains 
' smitten with the cold, dry petrifick mace ' of a false and unfeeling 
philosophy" (Payne's ed., p. 288). 

296. Delos', one of the Cyclades islands (v. 264, 265), in the yEgean 
Sea. " According to a legend, founded perhaps on some tradition of its 
late volcanic origin, it was called out of the deep by the trident [cf. 'as 
with a trident,' 295] of Poseidon [ = Neptune], but was a floating island 
until Zeus fastened it by adamantine chains to the bottom of the sea, 
that it might be a secure resting-place to Leto, for the birth of Apollo 
and Artemis." Classical Dictionary. 

296, 297. his look, i.e. like the look of the Gorgons which turned 
men into stone. 

Gorgonian, petrifying; cf. II. 6rr, " Gorgonian terror." 

298. asphaltic slime, i.e. asphalt or bitumen (cf. 562), such as that 



NOTES. 597 

which floats on the surface of the Dead Sea thence called 'Lake 
Asphaltites? a name said to have been first given it by the historian 
Diodorus Siculus (2nd century A.D.). Probably Milton here had in 
mind Genesis xi. 3, where the Hebrew word used for this bituminous 
substance is rendered 'slime.' The substance is " petroleum hardened 
by evaporation and oxidation," and the lumps of it appear in the water 
especially after earthquakes. See again 561, 562, note; also I. 411, 
xii. 41, 42, notes. 

299, 300. deep to the roots... they fastened, i.e. laid the foundation of 
the structure, mole, causeway = Latin moles , used of any massive 
structure, e.g. a dam or pier. 

Johnson considered that M. had here assigned to Sin and Death 
"a work too bulky for ideal architects," i.e. too material for allegorical 
figures. Addison had doubted whether " persons of such a chimerical 
existence are proper actors in an epic poem," but showed that the 
reason why M. introduced them lay in the subject of his poem, i.e. in 
the paucity of dramatis persona which it afforded. And he praised 
greatly the allegory in book II., from the point of view of allegory. 

305. inoffensive, free from obstacles (Lat. inoffensus) ; literally, 'not 
causing one to offend, i.e. stumble against' (Lat. offendere). 

306. if great things... M. has this Vergilian allusion in n. 921, 
922, vi. 310, 311, P. R. iv. 563, 564. 

307 n. Alluding to the invasion of Greece by Xerxes B.C. 480. 

308. Susa ; a Persian city of the province of Susiana and winter 
residence of the kings of Persia ; see P. R. ill. 288. According to 
tradition, Susa was founded by Tithonus, the father of Memnon (see  
Penseroso, 18), and Memnon built its acropolis, called after him the 
Memnonium. Susa is the Shushan of Esther i. 2 and Daniel viii. 2, 
passages of which perhaps we have an echo in " Memnonianaar^." 

310. bridging', with the bridge of boats described by Herodotus 
VII. 36. See Mayor's notes on Juvenal x. 173 76. 

311. The reference is to the story told by Herodotus (vn. 35), that 
Xerxes in his anger at the destruction of his first bridge by a storm 
ordered the Hellespont to receive three hundred lashes from a " scourge" 
rpiriKOffias tiriKtffOat jucUrrryi irXrjyds and to have a pair of fetters 
thrown into it. Cf. Johnson's Vanity of Human Wishes, 231, 232: 

"Fresh praise is try'd till madness fires his mind 

The waves he lashes, and enchains the wind " 
(said of Xerxes). 

indignant', cf. Georg. n. 161, 162, sEneid iu. 728 (pontem indig- 
natus Araxes). See 417, 418. 

313. pontifical', literally 'bridge-making' (Lat. pons+facere) ; cf. 



598 PARADISE LOST. BOOK X. 

pontifice, 348. It has been suggested that M. used the word with a 
sarcastic allusion to its other sense 'belonging to the Pontiff, i.e. the 
Pope.' Cf. i. 795, note. 

314. vexed, storm-tost; cf. I. 306, and see VII. 211 15. 

316. first lighted. See in. 418 22. 

317. The original editions have no comma after " Chaos," and the 
construction intended might be " landed to the outside," i.e. on to ; but 
it seems better to regard the words "to the outside" as a kind of 
explanation of "to the self- same place where " : taken thus, they define 
the place. 

323. interposed, i.e. between "the confines" of Heaven and those 
of the World. The bridge from Hell touched the outer surface of this 
World at the point where (i) the stair from Heaven also touched the 
surface, and where (2) the passage led down to the interior of the World. 
The bridge therefore resembles the middle one of three roads which 
form a junction. 

327. in likeness, i.e. "disguised " (330), as in III. 634 44, 694. 

328, 329. "Satan, to avoid being discovered (as he had been 
before, IV. 569 et seq.) by Uriel regent of the Sun [see ix. 60 62, note], 
takes care to keep at as great a distance as possible, and therefore, 
'while the sun rose in Aries,' he steers his course directly upwards 
'betwixt the Centaur and the Scorpion,' two constellations which lay in 
a quite different part of the heavens from Aries " (Newton). 

steering, steering to. his zenith, i.e. straight upwards, towards that 
opening in the surface of the globe through which he had descended 
into the interior (in. 526 et seq.) and Sin and Death were about to 
descend. 

332. after Eve seduced} for the Latinised turn of phrase see 577, 
687, and cf. I. 573. unmlnded, unnoticed, i.e. by Eve. 

335. unweeting, ignorant, i.e. of the results of her action, or of 
Satan's proximity. M. always (cf. 916) uses this form, seconded, 
repeated. 

33<>, 337- C{ - IX - '"3. IIf 4- 

344 345- understood, i.e. being understood. The original editions 
have a full stop after time in 345, making understood a past tense, 
instead of participle, with the subject ' he ' omitted. The correction 
(Tickell's) seems certain and is generally adopted now. 

345, 346. joy and tidings ; probably meant as a hendiadys = * joyful 
tidings.' 

347, 348. the foot', meaning, of course, the top of the bridge 
("pontifke"). 

351. stupendous', in the original editions ' stupendbus.' 



NOTES. 599 

358, 359- Cf - H<5. 

364. consequence, connection. 

370. fortify, build. 

372. virtue, courage (Lat. virtus}  cf. I. 320. 

374. odds y advantage. 

378. doom, judgment, decree. 

379. Cf. Satan's own words in iv. no 12, where he means that 
he rules Hell already and hopes to rule the World, leaving Heaven to 
the Almighty. 

380. 381. the empyreal bounds, the confines of the Empyrean or 
Heaven, which M. here treats as a square (" quadrature ") in allusion to 
the description of the New Jerusalem in Revelation xxi. 16; previously 
he left its shape an undecided question (ll. 1048). 

orbicular; the World is always spoken of in the poem as a 
globe. 

382. try, i.e. and find. 

383. the Prince of Darkness ; a stereotyped phrase ; cf. King Lear, 
III. 4 . 148, Airs Well That Ends Well, IV. 5. 44, 45. 

386, 387. Alluding to the meaning of Satan, viz. ' Adversary.' 

389. empire "Powers " in 395. 

389 91. The sense is 'That have met my triumphal act, my 
work, viz. the discovery and conquest of the new World, with your 
triumphal act, your glorious work, viz. the construction of this bridge.' 

397 398- See the account in in. 561 742 of Satan's own descent 
to the Earth, "amongst innumerable stars" (in. 565) = "among these 
numerous orbs" (397). 

399 402. Cf. Satan's promise to Sin in II. 83844, where he 
tells her of the new World to which he is journeying. 

409. no detriment. An allusion to the formula conferring supreme 
power on the Consuls at Rome in times of great crisis, namely, videant 
(or dent operam. etc.) consules ne quid respublica detrimenti capiat. 

413. " Strike " ( = ' to blast ') was the word applied to the evil "in- 
fluence " which astrologists supposed the planets to exercise on the earth. 
Cf. Hamlet, I. i. 162, "The nights are wholesome; then no planets 
strike." The belief survives in ' moon-struck.' M. says that the planets 
themselves were ' blasted ' by bad " influence " as Sin and Death passed . 
near them. 

415. causey, causeway, road. 

424. Pandemonium ; cf. I. 756. 

425. 426. Cf. vn. 131 34, notes. 

426. paragoned, compared j cf. Antony and Cleopatra, I. 5. 
i 2: 



600 PARADISE LOST. BOOK X. 

"If thou with Caesar paragon again 
My man of men." 

So Drummond in A Cypress Grove, in the passage on the bliss of 
the righteous after death: "all pleasure [i.e. on earth], paragoned with 
what is here, is pain, all mirth mourning, all beauty deformity" ( Works, 
II. -279). The literal idea of the noun paragon is 'a model, pattern': 
hence the notions ' rival ' and ' comparison.' Shakespeare uses the verb 
= 'to excel' a natural extension of the sense 'rival'; cf. Othello, II. 
i. 61 63: 

"a maid 

That paragons description and wild fame ; 
One that excels the quirks of blazoning pens." 

427. the Grand, the great ones (Ital. i grandi), being " the great 
consulting peers " (456) who held the council in bk. 11. 

430. observed, obeyed ; cf. I. 588. 

43i 432* Cf. the first lines of Milton's History of Moscovia 
"The Empire of Moscovia, or as others call it Russia, is bounded... 
on the east by the river Ob, or Oby [see ix. 78], and the Nagayan 
Tartars on the Volga as far as Astracan" 

433. Bactrian^ Persian, the ancient Bactria or Bactriana having 
been a province of the Persian empire; cf. P. R. III. 285. 

Sophi, Shah. 

from the horns, i.e. retreats before the Turkish armies. " During 
the sixteenth century there was continual warfare between the Persians 
and the Ottoman Turks, who were the masters of Asia Minor and 
Syria " (Keightley). 

horns', alluding to the shape a half-moon or "crescent" of the 
ensign of the Turks ; cf. Sylvester's Du Bartas, " The moony Standards 
of proud Ottoman" (Grosart's ed., I. 31 ; see also II. 42). 

435. Aladttle; the Greater Armenia, so called by the Turks from 
Aladules, the last king of the country, slain by the emperor Selfm I. 
(from Hume's note). A province of " Aliduli " is marked in the map of 
the "Turkish Empire" in Hexham's English edition (1636) of Mer- 
eater's Atlas. There is reason to believe that M. made use of this 
particular Atlas (which has full descriptions as well as maps), and took 
from it the names "Namancos" and "Bayona" in Lycidas, 162. 

436. Tauris, the modern Tabriz, in the north of Persia ; not far 
from the Armenian frontier. 

Casbeen, Kazvin, north of Teheran, the capital of Persia. 

438. reduced, led back ; Lat. reducere, 'to lead back,' e.g. troops. 

441 50. Editors compare ALneidi. 439, 440, 586 89. 

445. his high throne-, described in II. i 4. state, canopy. 



NOTES. 601 

450 52. M. dwells more than once on the "faded splendour" 
(IV. 870) of Satan's form. 

451. permissive. Elizabethan writers treat the termination -ive as 
passive in various adjectives. Cf. As Yott Like , in. 2. 10, "The 
fair, the chaste and unexpresszz^ she," i.e. ' inexpress^.' So " insup- 
pressive," not to be suppressed, Julius Ccesar, II. i. 134 ; and " uncom- 
prehensive," Troilus and Cressida, in. 3. 198. 

453. Cf. "the Stygian council" (11. 506), used similarly of Satan's 
followers. Milton's whole conception of " Hell " owes much to the 
classics; cf. especially II. 57586 with sEneid vi. 295 et seq. 

456. forth rushed '; since they sat in council " far within " the palace, 
away from the inferior Angels who thronged "the hall" (i. 791). 

457- " The Devils are frequently described by metaphors taken 
from the Turks. Satan is called the 'Sultan,' i. 348, as here the 
council is styled the ' Divan ' " (Newton). 

divan, council ; cf. Dryden's State of Innocence: 

" 'tis not fit 

Our dark Divan in public view should sit." 
The State of Innocence was based on Paradise Lost. See Introduction. 

45$ 459. Cf. the picture of a great orator in IX. 670 76. Editors 
compare Lucan, Pharsalia i. 297, 298. 

461. They have, he says, a double claim to these titles implying 
lordship and power: (i) the claim of possession, since they are 
now to "possess a spacious World" (466, 467) and be lords thereof; 
(2) the claim of ancient right, since these titles belonged to them in 
Heaven. The form of the commencement of the speech resembles 
II. 1114, v. 361, 362. 

465. the house of woe ; repeated from vi. 877. 

469. long were to tell; like Lat. longum est see I. 507. 

470 80. Cf. the description of Satan's journey through Chaos 
( = "the Deep," 471, "the Abyss," 476) in bk. H. 629 et seq. 

471. unreal ; " because . . . always changing. " 

475. uncouth, unknown, strange. M. accents uncouth. 

477. unoriginal, having no originator, being itself " eldest of things," 
II. 962. 

478 80. Chaos, far from "opposing" his journey, directed him 
on his course, II. 1004 1009. He magnifies his exploits to win 
"transcendent glory. ..above his fellows," n. 427, 428. 

protesting Fate, i.e. objecting that Fate did not mean the "secrets" 
of their realm to be explored thus. 

481, 482. Cf. Beelzebub's speech at the infernal council in 11. 
345 5 i- 



6O2 PARADISE LOST. BOOK X. 

512. clung ; probably a participle = ' pressed tight.' 

513. supplanted', in the literal sense 'tripped up'; from Lat. 
supplantare, 'to trip up, to throw a man off his feet* a wrestler's 
term. 

514. " Milton. ..had no doubt in mind the transformation of Cadmus 
in the fourth book of the Metamorphoses, to which he had alluded 
before in IX. 506" (Newton); also Dante, Inferno, xxiv., XXV. (Todd). 
Dante's description (canto XX V.) of the transformation of the five 
criminals into reptiles is much more detailed than Milton's, and 
repulsive. 

515. reluctant ; used literally = ' struggling against'; Lat. reluc- 
tart. Cf. 1045. 

517. his doom ; as pronounced on the Serpent in 175 77. Cf. the 
" Argument " of the book. 

521. riot t i.e. rebellion in Heaven ; cf. Lat. tumult us. 

521 28. This passage is perhaps the most striking example of 
alliteration and assonance in the poem, the effect being designed partly 
to suggest to the ear the actual sound described, partly to convey to 
the imagination a sense of the terror of the whole scene. Thus the 
repeated sibilant represents the hissing; cf. I. 768, ix. 613. On the 
other hand, the repetition of sound in "dreadful," "iin," "afire," 
*'<rear" etc. seems to intensify the horror of the event. A similar, 
though less striking, instance of the same effect occurs in XI. 489 92. 

523. complicated, twisted, twined together; Lat. complicare, 'to 
tie up.' 

524. amphisbana; a kind of serpent, supposed to have a head at 
either end of its body. Sir Thomas Browne has a chapter (xv.) "Of 
the amphisbaena" in his Vulgar Errors, III., his conclusion being that 
" we must crave leave to doubt of this double-headed serpent." 

525. cerastes; Gk. Kepdorjjs, 'a horned snake,' from cfyas, 'a horn.' 
Dante describes the Furies as "girt with greenest hydras; for hair, 

they had little serpents and cerastes, wherewith their horrid temples 
were bound" (Inferno, ix. 40 42). 

hydrus ; a water-snake ; cf. Gk. CSwj, ' water.' 

ellops ; Gk. Xo^, 'mute' ; an epithet of fish ; then used substantively 
for a certain sea-fish (probably the swordfish or sturgeon) and later = 
'serpent.' 

526. dipsas ; a serpent whose bite caused great thirst (Gk. Styoj). 
526, 527. the soil, i.e. Libya in Africa. An allusion to the legend 

that as Perseus was bringing back the head of Medusa, one of the Gorgons, 
who had hissing snakes instead of hair, drops of her blood fell on the 
soil and caused the country to abound with serpents. Ovid touches on 



NOTES. 603 

the story, Metamorphoses iv. 613 19, while Lucan enumerates the 
kinds of serpents, and his account (Pharsalia ix. 70033) was probably 
in Milton's thoughts. 

5-28. Ophiusa ; the island of serpents = Gk. <50tou<r<ra, i.e. (50i6e<ra-a, 
'abounding in serpents'; a small island in the Mediterranean, to which 
the Romans gave the similar name ' Colubraria,' from coluber, ' a snake,' 
adder. Now Formentera, one of the Balearic group. 

529. dragon ; cf. "the dragon "= Satan in Revelation xii. Gk. 
dpaKcw, 'serpent.' 

529 31. Ovid speaks of the monstrous serpent Python, born from 
the slime left on the earth by the flood of Deucalion Metamorphoses I. 
434 et seq. 

535. in station...or just array; "either on guard or drawn up in 
military array to receive and do him honour" (Keightley). Lat. in 
statione, a military term = ' on guard'; cf. " stations " = ' sentinels, 
pickets,' n. 412. just, regular, due (Lat. Justus)-, cf. 888. 

536. stiblime=Lz.. sublimis in its figurative sense 'uplifted.' Cf. 
S. A. 1669, " While their hearts were jpcund and sublime." 

541. changing, i.e. changing into. 

54I 45> The partial repetition of the alliterative effect of 521 
28, to recall and point the likeness to the previous scene of transforma- 
tion, is surely a very happy device. 

546. exploding, driving off the scene. 

550. fair ; accidentally omitted in the Second Ed. : hence a wrong 
reading "like to that," current in later editions till Newton restored the 
true text. 

560. Megcera ; one of the Eumenides or Furies, who are described 
as having serpents twined in their hair. 

561, 562. Alluding to the apples of the Dead Sea =" that bituminous 
lake." Cf. Eikonoklastes, 24 : " Thus these pious flourishes and colours 
[i.e. excuses], examined thoroughly, are like the apples of Asphaltis 
[see 298, note], appearing goodly to the sudden eye ; but look well upon 
them, or at least but touch them, and they turn into cinders." 

lake cf. the other common name for the Dead Sea, viz. 'Lake 
Asphaltites? 

565. -with gust ; as we say, ' with gusto.' 

567 70. The sound is meant to echo the sense. 

568. drugged, nauseated as ' ' with the hateful taste usually found 
in drugs" (Richardson). 

572. triumphed, i.e. over, once; emphatic. Man was deceived 
(by the Serpent) but "once"; the serpents were duped "oft." 

lapsed ; a preterite, I think ; * fell into error.' 



604 PARADISE LOST. BOOK X. 

57 2 > 573 The original editions read: 

"Thus were they plagu'd 

And worn with famin, long and ceaseless hiss." 
It seems to me simplest to suppose that the printer misplaced the comma 
after "famine " ; if we put it after " long," then " famine " and " hiss " 
(a noun) are balanced with their respective epithets, and the balance 
gives an admirable rhythm, while the turn of phrase " worn with famine, 
and hiss " is quite characteristic. Keightley printed : 

"Thus were they plagued; 

And, worn with famine, long and ceaseless hiss"; 
taking " hiss " as a verb. Other editors have followed him (some placing 
a comma instead of a semicolon after "plagued "). This interpretation 
appears to me to be open to several objections. It rather implies that 
the "famine" was the cause of the hissing; involves a most awkward 
change from the past tense in 572 to the present in 573 and then back to 
the past in 574, and yields, surely, an unpleasant rhythm. 

575 77. No doubt, M. had some authority for this tradition, 
but editors have failed to find it. The nearest approach to it known 
to Newton was the speech of the Fairy Manto in Ariosto's Orlando 
Furioso, XLIII. 98: 

" Each sev'nth day we constrained are to take 

Upon ourselves the person of a snake" (Harrington's trans.). 
some say ; a convenient phrase, under cover of which he can 
mention theories, yet avoid the responsibility of accepting them. Cf. 
668, 671, ix. 638. 

578. We must remember that according to the ordinary patristic 
and mediaeval belief which M. accepted (see Appendix, pp. 672 74), the 
fallen Angels became the gods of classical mythology : hence there might 
well be among " the heathen " some tradition of the story of Eve and 
the Serpent. So M. identifies the Serpent (Satan) with Ophion (cf. 
Gk. Jtyus, ' a serpent '), one of the Titans and the first ruler of Olympus ; 
and suggests that Eurynome, the daughter of Oceanus and wife of 
Ophion, may have been the same as Eve. Newton showed that in the 
allusion to Ophion and Eurynome M. had in his thoughts a passage of 
the Argonautica (i. 503 509) of Apollonius Rhodius. 

579. purchase, prey, i.e. mankind. In Comus, 607, "And force 
him to return his purchase back," the first version (Cambridge MS.) 
has "And force him to release his new got prey" 

581, 582. ivide-encroaching. "Some epithet should be added to 
Eve to shew the similitude between her and Eurynome, and why he 
takes the one for the other; and therefore in allusion to the name 
Eurynome [ = ' wide-ruling'] he styles Eve ' the wide-encroaching,' as 



NOTES. 605 

extending her rule and dominion farther than she should over her 
husband, and affecting godhead " (Newton). 

584. Ops, the wife of Saturn. Dictaan, Cretan, from Dicte, a 
mountain of Crete in which island Jupiter was brought up. The legend 
that Zeus (Jupiter) expelled Cronos (Saturn) from Olympus (i. 516, 
VII. 3, 7), the 'heaven' of later classical mythology, and from sovereignty 
over gods and men, is touched on in  Penseroso, 30. 

586, 587. in power ; potentially. 

actual, the cause of an act, viz. Eve's act of disobedience. No 
doubt, M. is alluding to the theological term "actual sin," which he 
defines as " crime itself, or the act of sinning," and discusses in The 
Christian Doctrine, I. n (P. W. iv. 262). Compare the Prayer- 
Book, " Articles of Religion," xxxi. 

58890. Cf. Rev. vi. 8, "And I looked, and behold a pale horse : 
and his name that sat on him was Death, and Hell followed with him." 

591. second; Sin herself was first. 

60 1. unhide-bound, with the skin hanging loose about it, hence 
capable of containing much. 

606. scythe ; the traditional attribute of Time and Death. Cf. 
Shakespeare, Sonnet 12, "And nothing 'gainst Time's scythe can 
make defence." 

616 40. This speech is noticeable as not being so Biblical in 
character as most of those which M. assigns to the Almighty. 

616, 617. M. seems to have had in his thoughts Julius Caesar, ill. 
i. 273, " Cry ' Havoc,' and let slip the dogs of war." The phrase 'cry 
" havoc,'" imitated from O. Fr. crier havot, was an old military term for 
'giving no quarter,' i.e. it was the signal for indiscriminate slaughter; 
so that " to havoc yonder world " was an even stronger expression then 
than it is now. dogs of Hell  cf. II. 653 59. 

623. enter and possess', " terms of English law" (Keightley). For 
possess* take possession of cf. Romeo and Juliet, III. 2. 27. 

624. conniving, tolerating, permitting, them. 

632. cramnfd suitable to the context; but in Comus, 713, Milton's 
unerring taste substituted thronging for the first reading : 

"Cramming the seas w th spawne innumerable." 

638. Heaven and Earth the World, as often in Scripture. 

made pure, i.e. by fire, according to 2 Peter iii. 7, 10 13. See ill. 
333 35. In The Christian Doctrine, I. 33, lie treats of "the 
destruction of the present unclean and polluted world, namely, its 
final conflagration" (P. W. IV. 488). 

640. precedes ; " shall go before those ravagers Sin and Death, and 
shall direct and lead them on" (Newton). But might not .the sense be 



606 PARADISE LOST. BOOK X. 

'has precedence = prevails, ' the notion being that "the curse" has power 
for a time but will in the end be annulled ? Bentley suggested proceeds , 
i.e. goes on, continues. 

642. as the sound, resembling the sound, by reason of the multitude 
of voices; being even "as the voice of many waters," Revelation 
xix. 6. Cf. v. 872, 873. 

643, 644. Cf. Revelation xv. 3, xvi. 7. To "justify the ways of 
God to men" (i. 26) was Milton's aim in composing Paradise Lost. 

645. extenuate, weaken; properly 'make slight' (Lat. tennis]. 

647, 648. "And I saw a new heaven and a new earth. ..And the 
holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven " 
Revelation xxi. i, 2; see also verse 10 and note "descending." 

to the ages, i.e. for the succeeding ages, rise, i.e. from the confla- 
gration. 

650. his mighty Angels ; meaning, probably, " the seven Spirits" 
of God "which are before his throne" and execute his commands on 
Earth. See the description of them in ill. 648 53. Of these Uriel 
was one. 

651. In The Christian Doctrine, I. 13, he says, "All nature is 
subject to mortality and a curse on account of man " ; and that thought 
is the basis of this long passage dealing with the deterioration in the 
physical Universe which followed the Fall of Man. The main Scriptural 
authority for this thought which M. quotes is Genesis iii. 17, "cursed is 
the ground for thy sake." The idea comes in Drummond's " Hymn of 
the Fairest Fair," 26384 (Flowers of Sion). Cf. also the third draft 
of Milton's contemplated tragedy of Paradise Lost, in the outline of the 
action of Act v. Cf. ix. 132, 133. 

656. blanc, ' pale ' (Fr. blanc, ' white '). 

657. the other Jive, i.e. planets. 

658 62. On the astrological terms in these lines, see pp. 691, 692. 

the fixed, i.e. stars; see in. 481, note. 

663. which of them', e.g. Orion "with fierce winds... armed," I. 305. 

665. their corners, their respective quarters, when, i.e. and also 
the times when, confound, mingle, make undistinguishable. 

666. The winds are said to "roll the thunder" because they " roll " 
the clouds which cause the thunder. 

668 78. Dr Masson explains : " It is poetically assumed here 
that, before the Fall, the ecliptic or Sun's path was in the same plane as 
the Earth's equator, and that the present obliquity of the two planes, or 
their intersection at an angle of 23^, was a modification of the physical 
Universe for the worse, consequent upon the moral evil introduced by 
sin. But this physical alteration might be produced in either of two 



NOTES. 607 

ways : either by pushing askance the axis of the Earth the required 
distance, leaving the Sun undisturbed ; or by leaving the Earth undis- 
turbed and compelling the Sun to deviate the required distance (' like 
distant breadth ') from his former equatorial or equinoctial path. To 
indicate what ' the like distant breadth' would amount to, Milton follows 
the Sun in imagination after his deviation from the equatorial line : 
tracing him, first, in his ascent north of the equator, through the constel- 
lations Taurus (in whose neck are the Pleiades, called the Seven 
Atlantic Sisters, as being mythologically the daughters of Atlas) and 
Gemini (called ' the Spartan twins,' as representing Castor and Pollux, 
the twin-sons of Tyndarus, King of Sparta), up to his extreme distance 
from the equator at the Crab, in the Tropic of Cancer ; then returning 
with him in his descending path by Leo and Virgo, till he again touches 
the equator at Libra ; and, for the rest, simply suggesting his similar 
deviation from the equator to the south by naming the Tropic of 
Capricorn as the farthest point reached on that side.... He [Milton] 
gives the larger space to the hypothesis of a change of the Sun's 
path." 

671. the centric globe, the Earth, the centre of the Universe, 
according to the Ptolemaic system. 

676. the Scales Libra (ill. 558). 

678, 679. He has previously said that before the Fall only one 
season was known in Eden, viz. "eternal spring," iv. 268: a view 
held by some of the Church Fathers. See also V. 394, 395. When 
Dante reaches the Garden of Eden he is told (Purgatorio, xxvill. 142, 
143) : " Here the root of man's race was innocent ; here spring is ever- 
lasting, and every kind of fruit" (cf. V. 341). Classical mythology 
spoke similarly of the Golden Age ; see 7*he Advancement of Learning, 
II. so. 9, where editors cite Ovid, Metamorphoses I. 107 (ver erat 
ceternum, etc.). 

680 84. "If the Sun were to be always in the equator, there 
could never be night at the poles, the sun going round and round 
continually in the horizon" (Keightley). 

685 87. i.e. the sun would have prevented the snow stretching 
so far southward from the North Pole as it does at present, and conversely 
an equal distance northward from the South Pole. 

Estotiland an old name, applied not very precisely, to the part of 
North America lying between Baffin's Bay and Hudson's Bay. The 
description (n. 436) of the chief provinces of North America in Hexham's 
Mercator (1636) mentions both " Estotilandia " and "Norumbega" 
(see 696). 

Magellan, i.e. the Strait of, in South America; named after the 
Portuguese navigator Magelhaens. 



6oS PARADISE LOST. BOOK X. 

688. An allusion to the story of the revenge taken by Atreus, 
king of Mycence, on his brother Thyestes, who had wronged him and 
been banished : how " Atreus, pretending to be reconciled to Thyestes, 
recalled him to Mycenae, killed his two sons, and placed their flesh 
before their father at a banquet, who unwittingly partook of the horrid 
meal" (Classical Dictionary). This spectacle is said to have caused the 
sun to turn aside, and M. suggests that the feasting on the forbidden 
fruit worked a like effect. 

Thyestean; I think that M. intended us to scan ' Thyest(e)an,' eliding 
the e of the termination, instead of accentuating it according to the 
correct rendering ' Thyeslean.' Good critics, e.g. Mr Bridges, recognise 
a similar scansion in S. A. 133, " Chaly|b(e)an tem|per'd steel, and frock 
of mail" instead of 'Chalybean.' Dr Abbot scans 'Epicurean' in 
Antony and Cleopatra^ II. i. 24, and says that "the Elizabethans 
generally did not accent the e in such words." 

689 91. i.e. the sun's course before the Fall must have differed 
from its present course : otherwise the World would not have escaped 
extremes of heat and cold then any more than it does now. 

693. sideral, of the stars (Lat. sidera). blast, i.e. blasting "influence." 

696. Norumbega ; an obsolete name for a great tract comprehending 
in modern nomenclature southern Canada and the northern states of 
America, e.g. New York and Maine. " Norumbega " is marked thus 
both in Hexham's general map of America and also in that of " New 
England." In Milton's time the application of names to these distant 
regions was rather vague. 

the Samoed shore, i.e. the shore of north-eastern Siberia, near the 
Gulf of Obi in the Arctic Ocean. In Milton's History of Moscovia is a 
chapter on " Samoedia, Siberia, and other countries north-east, subject 
to the Muscovites," P. W. v. 403, 404 ; with references to Purchas's 
Pilgrimage. 

697. their brazen dungeon ; suggested perhaps by the prison of the 
winds guarded by ^iolus ; cf. sEneid I. 52 et seq. 

698. flaw, a gust of wind. "Gust and flaw" seems to have been 
a common combination ; cf. Venus and Adonis, 456. 

699. 700. Boreas, the north wind; Ccccias, the north-east, Gk. 
caiKtas. Cf. Holland's translation (1603) of Plutarch's Morals, "like 
unto the north-east winde Ccecias, which evermore gathereth the clouds 
unto it " (p. 379, quoted in the Stanford Dictionary). Argestes, the 
north-west wind ; Thrascias, the north-north-west ; Gk. ffpacrKias, also 
spelt QpaKlas, i.e. the wind that blew from Thrace. 

702. Notus, the south wind; Afer, the south-west; lit. 'the 
African' (Lat. afer), i.e. wind; cf. creber procellis Africns 
I. 85, 86. 



NOTES. 609 

703. Serraliona, i.e. Sierra Leone, off the west coast of Africa; 
literally the ' Lioness Mountain,' from Spanish sierra, 'a saw,' hence 'a 
jagged mountain ridge or chain of mountains,' and leona, 'a lioness.' It 
was evidently proverbial for storms ; cf. Hexham's Mercator, II. 426 : 
" Sierra Liona is... a very high Mount, the toppe whereof is continually 
hidde with snowe : from whence there comes fearefull noises, and great 
tempest." 

73 76' To heighten the confusion of the contest between the 
winds from the north (699, 700) and those from the south (701, 702), 
there rush forth to the fray winds from either side, viz. Eurus, the east 
wind, and Sirocco, the south-east: Zephyrus, the west wind, and 
Libecchio, the south-west. 

704. Levant and Ponent ; the rising and setting winds, i.e. those 
which come from the quarters where the sun respectively rises and sets. 
From Fr. levant and ponent, used thus. Cf. levant^' sunrise,' e.g. in 
Holland's Pliny (1601), xvni. 33, "the Sunne rising or Levant of that 
day." A later word, with the same sense, is levanter. 

705. with their lateral noise ; qualifying, I think, " Eurus and 
Zephyr," as being "lateral" in relation to the north and south winds; 
but some editors connect the words with " Sirocco, and Libecchio " as 
describing their relation to " Eurus and Zephyr." 

706. Sirocco... Libecchio ; Italian names (whereas all the others in 
the passage are classical), the two winds being peculiar to the shores of 
the Mediterranean and the south of Europe. Ital. sirocco, from Arabic 
sharq, 'east.' 

710 14. Previously (iv. 340 47) the beasts had known neither 
strife among themselves nor fear of man. 

711. "It was [Milton's] notion that beast, fowl, and fish [all] 
grazed the herb before the Fall " (Newton). Cf. Gen. i. 30, and see 
P. L. vii. 403, 404. 

714 17. Newton well remarks on the skill with which the 
transition to Adam again is effected. " We have seen great alterations 
produced in nature, and it is now time to see how Adam is affected with 
them, and whether the disorders within are not even worse than those 
without? 

718. " The wicked are like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest," 
Isaiah Ivii. 20. Todd quotes from one of Milton's minor pamphlets, 
Colasterion : ' ' Tost and tempested in a most unquiet sea of afflictions 
and temptations " (P. W. in. 450) ; and remarks : " The sea of sorrow, 
or of evils, is a frequent expression in the Greek and Latin, as well 
as in our own, poets." Cf. cacw; TrtXayos in ^Eschylus, Persce 433, 
and the famous line in Hamlet (ill. i. 59). 

p. L. 39 



6lO PARADISE LOST. BOOK X. 

In The Reason of Church Government, IT., M. speaks of himself 
giving up the quiet life of a student, " to embark in a troubled sea of 
noises and hoarse disputes " (i.e. politics and controversy) P. IV. n. 481. 

719. disburden, himself. "A metaphor taken from a ship in a 
tempest, unlading, disburdening, to preserve itself from sinking by 
its weight" (Richardson). The metaphor follows naturally on line 
718. Cf. Richard II. II. i. 228, 229: 

" My heart is great ; but it must break with silence, 
Ere't be disburden'd with a liberal tongue." 

720. miserable of happy; on this idiom see IV. 153 (note) ; cf. 723. 
723. the face. Cf. IX. 108082. 

728, 729. "Meat and drink propagate it ['curse'] by prolonging 
life, and children by carrying it on to posterity " (Newton). 

In his Essay on Milton (see I. 261 63, note), William Lander 
translated these lines into quod comedo, poto, gigno, diris subjacet, and 
pretended that the Latin occurred in the tragedy of Adamus Exul 
(1601) a very rare work of the jurist Grotius. Two lines earlier in 
this book (616, 617) were derived by Lander from an equally fictitious 
hexameter infernique canes populantur cuncta creata ascribed to a 
work published in 1654 by a certain Jacobus Masenius, professor in the 
Jesuits' College at Cologne. 

729, 730. Genesis i. 28. See vii. 530, 531. 

736. See v. 396, note. 

737. the execration, i.e. " 111 fare our Ancestor impure ! " 735. Cf. 
821, 822. 

738. mine o^vn ; the only noun to which these words can well refer 
is "curses" (732), but the sense is 'afflictions, evils.' 

all from me, all the afflictions derived from me, i.e. those of his 
descendants. 

739. redoiind', in the literal sense 'flow back' (Lat. redundare}. 
The metaphor is changed in the next line ("light"). Some editions 
misprint rebound. 

740. 741. "These curses, though lighting on him their centre, will 
weigh heavy, though according to the laws of physics they should not 
weigh anything there, the weight of bodies being only their tendency 
to the centre " (Keightley). Critics have censured the style as forced 
and colloquial (cf. 736). 

743. Isaiah xlv. 9. 

748. equal, fair (Lat. aquus). reduce ; in the literal sense 'to bring 
back ' (Lat. reducere), i.e. to the dust of which Adam was made. 

758. thou didst ; addressing himself, not his Maker, as in 74355. 
The abrupt transitions show his emotion. 



NOTES. 6ll 

762. Isaiah xlv. 10. 

773. this day ; Adam should have said " that day" cf. 49, 210. 
The time of the action of this book is the day after Adam's sin. Cf. 
the time references in 329 (" the sun rose ") and 342 ("by night "). 

778. my mother's lap ; a curious expression from Adam's lips ; see 
xi. 536. 

783. all cf. Horace's non omnis moriar Odes ill. 30. 6 (said, 
however, in a different connection, viz. in reference to the immortality 
conferred by his poetry). 

784, 785. Genesis ii 7. Horace calls the breath of life divince par- 
ticulam aura {Sat. II. 2. 79). inspired; in the literal sense ' breathed.' 

788. a living death ; a proverbial phrase; cf. S. A. TOO, " To live 
a life half dead, a living death." So in Richard III. I. 2. 153 ; Lucrece, 
726. 

789 92. The spirit, Adam is made to argue, constitutes life (cf. 
"pure breath of life") and the spirit alone "sinned": the body is mere 
" dust," a "clod," and as such " properly hath neither" life nor sin : 
therefore "death," as the annihilation of life and punishment of sin, 
must mean the death of the spirit. So the "end" (797) will be not 
merely the dissolution of the mortal body into its dust but annihilation 
of the whole being "a of me shall die." 

The subject is discussed in The Christian Doctrine, I. 13. 

798 801. Cf. The Christian Doctrine, I. 2, where, treating of the 
"omnipotence" of the Almighty, he says, "It must be remembered 
that the power of God is not exerted in things which imply a contradic- 
tion" ; he quotes 2 Timothy ik 13, Hebrews vi. 18. It was a doctrine 
on which mediaeval theologians dwelt. 

806 808. all causes else... " All other agents act in proportion to 
the reception or capacity of the subject-matter, and not to the utmost 
extent of their own power [' sphere ']. An allusion to the axiom : omne 
efficient agitsecundum vires recipients, non suas" (Newton). So, Adam 
argues, he cannot be punished after death because death is the utmost 
punishment that he has the capacity to suffer : with death that capacity 
ends. 

810. bereaving sense ; cf. "insensible," 777. 

812. ^v^thout, outside; cf. Macbeth, ill. i. 47, "They are, my lord, 
without the palace gate." 

816. am; attracted to the nearer and, in Adam's view, more 
important subject "I." incorporate; cf. Romans vii. 20. 

832. me, me. Cf. 936 and Vergil's line me, me, adsum, qui fed, 
in me convertite ferrum ALneid ix. 427. 

840. past example, i.e. of the fallen Angels. 

392 



6l2 PARADISE LOST. BOOK X. 

842. In each of Milton's drafts of a tragedy on the theme of 
"Paradise Lost," Conscience is one of the abstract dramatis persona:. 
85259. Cf. 923, note. 

858. Death comes not at call. Cf. XI. 491 93. 
858, 859. Newton compares Horace's #& Pcena claudo Odes ill. 
2.32. 

860. Todd shows that this form of invocation is " after the manner 
of the Italian poets." Cf. too Tennyson's (Enone. 

86r, 862. other .. .other  a favourite form of emphasis with M. Cf. 
COMUS, 612, 613: 

" Far other arms and other weapons must 

Be those that quell the might of hellish charms " ; 
and Lycidas, 174. Cf. the Inferno, in. 91, 92, where Charon refuses 
to convey Dante across the great river of hell : "By other ways, 
by other ferries, not here, shalt thou pass over" (per altra via , per altri 
portt). So Mar veil in Upon the Hill at Billborow  

"'Much other groves,' say they, 'than these, 

And other hills, him once did please'"; 

and in his beautiful little poem The Garden ; and Tennyson in Tithonus : 
"Ay me ! ay me ! with what another heart 
In days far-off, and with what other eyes 
I used to watch ! " 

M. uses the artifice in his prose ; cf. On Edttcation, P. W. ill. 474. 
song cf. "their vocal worship," ix. 198, 199 (note). 
872, 873. pretended to ; literally 'stretched before,' Lat. prcetentus ; 
hence ' serving as a screen to, masking.' 

883. understood; the subject " I " is easily supplied from 880. 

886. sinister ; used quibblingly in its literal sense 'left' a reference 
to the tradition that the rib out of which Eve was fashioned was taken 
from Adam's left side (vin. 465, note) and also in the figurative sense 
' unlucky.' 

Scan sinister, as in Henry V. II. 4. 85, " 'Tis no sinister nor no 
awkward claim." This accentuation survived at least as late as 
Dryden ; cf. The Hind and the Panther, in. 492 : 
" In which sinister destinies ordain 

A dame should drown with all her feathered train." 
In M., as in Shakespeare and Elizabethan writers generally, many 
words bear the original Latin (and French) accent which later has 
yielded to the Teutonic tendency to shift the accent on to an earlier 
syllable. 

887, 888. It was an old belief that Adam as created had thirteen 
ribs on the left side and that Eve was formed out of the extra one. 



NOTES. 613 

888 98. Editors cite similar passages from other poets, in par- 
ticular a close parallel from Milton's favourite writer Euripides, viz. 
Hippolytus 616 et seq. See the chorus 1010 60 in S. A. 

898 906. The passage is like a commentary on the proverbial line, 
" The Course of true love never did run smooth," A Midsummer -Nighfs 
Dream, I. i. 134. That M. when he wrote the lines was thinking of 
the circumstances of his own first marriage cannot be doubted. 

904906. A personal allusion appears to be intended. Edward 
Phillips, the poet's nephew and one of his biographers, states that after 
Milton's first wife refused to live with him he paid much attention to a 
Miss Davis (possibly the lady addressed in his Sonnet "To a Virtuous 
young Lady ") ; so that " too late " represented his own experience. 

Probably "already linked, and wedlock-bound" refers to " he," and 
" fell adversary" to his wife, now a source of "hate or shame" to him; 
but the sense might be that the man meets "his happiest choice" 
after she is " linked" to his enemy, which state of things occasions 
him " hate or shame." 

921. forlorn of; cf. Tennyson's (Enone : 

" Hither came at noon 
Mournful CEnone, wandering forlorn 
Of Paris." 

923. scarce one short hour; in her grief she, like Adam (852 59), 
forgets the words of their Judge which clearly showed that "the instant 
stroke of death" was "removed far off" (210, 211). Contrast 962, 

963. 

937 46. Probably Milton's reconciliation with his own wife was 
present to his thoughts ; cf. S. A. 1003 1007 : 

" Yet beauty, though injurious, hath strange power, 
- After offence returning, to regain 

Love once possessed, nor can be easily 
N Repulsed, without much inward passion felt, 

And secret sting of amorous remorse." 

959. elsewhere, at " the place " (cf. 932, 953, 1098, 1099), where 
their Judge appeared to them and pronounced their sentence ; or 
perhaps he means 'in Heaven.' 

978. as in our evils, considering that we are in such evils ; Lat. ut. 
Richardson aptly quotes from Cicero's letters Ad familiares XI I. 2, non- 
nihil, ut in tantis malts, est profectum. Cf. ix. 1091. 

979. descent ; abstract for concrete ; * descendants.' 
987. prevent, anticipate, forestall. - 

989. In the early editions the words "so Death" were placed at 
the beginning of 990 ; doubtless an error, since there is no other instance 



614 PARADISE LOST. BOOK X. 

in the poem of a short line (as 989 would be without the two words), or 
of an Alexandrine. 

996. the present object, the object of your love who is present. 

1004 1006. and have. 'Though we have the power, through 
choosing the quickest of the many ways of dying, to destroy destruction 
(i.e. Death's future work of destroying mankind) by destroying ourselves.' 

1032 1035. Contrast 169 73 (with notes). 

1045. reluctance, struggling. 

1046 48. Cf. 96, " the mild Judge " ; and 1094 96. 

1053, 1054. He means that the curse in 198 208 applied more to 
the ground than to himself ; so he says quibblingly that it ' glanced ' off 
him and 'fell to the ground,' e.g. like an arrow that just grazes the 
object aimed at. 

1065. this mountain; see the note on iv. 134. 

1066. shattering. Cf. Lycidas, 5, " Shatter your leaves before the 
mellowing year"; where shatter is one of Milton's many felicities of 
alteration, displacing the prosaic word crop. 

locks. Cf. Lat. coma with its two senses, 'hair' and 'foliage.' See 
Horace, Odes IV. 7. 2 (arboribusque coma}. 

1068. shroud, shelter. 

1069. this. ..star, the sun; 'the day-star' (cf. "diurnal"), as it 
was sometimes called in contrast to the other heavenly bodies. 
Cf. Lycidas, 168, and Sylvester's Du Bartas, " While the bright day- 
star rides his glorious round," Grosart's ed., I. 143. (But commonly 
" day-star" meant the morning-star, Lucifer.) 

1070. how, i.e. to see how ; understood from seek in 1067. 

1071. foment, keep warm. M. uses the word in allusion to its 
(ultimate) derivation from Lat. fovere, ' to warm ' ; cf. Lat. fames, 
'tinder, touchwood.' Editors cite sEneid i. 174 76. 

They are to try to reflect the sun's rays in some mirror-like substance 
so as to kindle dry leaves and grasses, etc. 

1072. 1073. "He seems to suppose that in the collision of two 
bodies, as two flints or a flint and steel, it is the air that yields the fire" 
(Keightley). attrite, worn by friction ; Lat. attrittis. The idea is 
Lucretian. 

as late ; referring to the changes in the elements (651 et seq.). 

1075. tine, kindle, thwart, flashing across the sky. Probably 
he alludes to one of the theories as to the origin of fire on earth which 
Lucretius gives, V. 1091 94, viz. that it came through the thunderbolt 
and lightning. 

1081. praying; conditional, of grace, for mercy, pardon. 

1085. native home ; cf. 206 208. 



NOTES. 615 

1091. frequenting^ filling (Lat. frequentare). Cf. frequent 
* crowded' (frequens}, I. 797. 

IO ^8 1104. For a similar instance of repetition (a figure imitated 
from the classics) cf. iv. 641 56, vn. 26 (note), Comus, 221 24. 
prostrate fell. It is curious that the next book begins 
"Thus they, in lowliest plight, repentant stood 
Praying." 



BOOK XI. 

1,2. stood praying. Either this means ' continued praying,' or M. 
has forgotten x. 1099. In The Christian Doctrine, u. 4, he cites 
2 Chronicles xx. 5, and Luke xviii. 13, as illustrations of standing to 
pray (P. W. v. 34, 35). See iv. 720. 

the mercy-seat above. Cf. a beautiful passage in the treatise Of 
Reformation in England, II. : " had God been so minded, he could 
have sent a spirit of mutiny amongst us [the English and Scots]... but 
he, when we least deserved, sent out a gentle gale and message of 
peace from the wings of those his cherubims that fan his mercy-seat " 
(P. W. II. 406). See XII. 25254. 

3. prevenient grace. Cf. the Collect, " We pray thee that thy grace 
may always prevent and follow us." 

3 5. An allusion to Ezekiel xi. 19, " and I will take the stony 
heart out of their flesh, and will give them an heart of flesh " (see also 
xxxvi. 26). the stony  an example of the frequent substantival use of 
adjectives in M. 

5 8. An allusion to Romans viii. 26, " the Spirit itself maketh 
intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered." M. had 
used the same reference many years before; cf. Eikonoklastes, 16: 
"Though we know not what to pray as we ought, yet he with sighs 
unutterable by any words, much less by a stinted liturgy, dwelling in us 
makes intercession for us." 

8. yet; referring back to line i ' though they were in lowly plight, 
yet was their demeanour not mean.' port, bearing ; as in IV. 869. 

1014. The Greek story of Deucalion and Pyrrha, his wife, 
corresponds to the Scriptural account of the Flood (cf. Coriolanus, 
II. i. 102, The Winter's Tale, iv. 4. 441). They were the only 
survivors from the Deluge, and they consulted the sanctuary of Themis, 
goddess of custom and equity, how the race of man should be re- 



6l6 PARADISE LOST. BOOK XL 

stored. Ovid tells the tale, Metamorphoses I. 260 et seq. t and M. is 
thinking of his version. 

Bishop Hall has the quaint couplet (Satires, v. 3) : 
" O happy dayes of old Deucalion, 
When one was landlord of the world alone." 

ii. fables. Cf. I. 197, note, n. 627, S. A. 500. 

14. stood. In Ovid's account (375, 376), procumbit uterque Promts 
humi. 

14 1 6. M. is glancing at his own description of the Limbo or 
Paradise of Fools, the region into which foolish men who think to 
reach Heaven by wrong means are, just "at foot of Heaven's ascent," 
blown clean away by a violent gust. See III. 485 89. 

flew up; cf. Hamlet, in. 3. 97, 98. So in Eikonoklastes ', 16, 
speaking of the disadvantage (as he thought) of using a set form of 
prayers in worship, M. says : "The prayer having less intercourse and 
sympathy with a heart wherein it was not conceived, saves itself the 
labour of so long a journey downward [i.e. into the heart], and flying up 
in haste on the specious wings of formality, if it fall not back again 
headlong, instead of a prayer which was expected, presents God with 
a set of stale and empty words." 

17. dimensionless, i.e. as being spiritual, not material. 

1 7 20. M. has followed Revelation viii. 3, 4 very closely ; cf. also 
ix. 13, and Ps. cxli. a. 

28. manuring, tending, cultivating ; cf. IV. 628. 

31. sighs. ..mute. It has been noted that the expression mttla 
suspiria occurs in Statius, Thebais xi. 604. 

33. " And if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, 
Jesus Christ the righteous : and he is the propitiation for our sins," 
i John ii. i, a. 

40, 41. Cf. x. 76, 77. 

44. Alluding to John xvii.; cf. especially verses ii and 21 23. 

5053. Everything in Eden being pure would reject the pollution 
in Adam. There may be a reference to Leviticus xviii. 25, "the land 
is denied... and itself vomiteth out her inhabitants." 

56. of incorrupt, from the state of being incorrupt ; for the idiom, 
see iv. 153, x. 720, xn. 167. 

60. eternize, make everlasting; in VI. 374, the word has its com- 
moner Elizabethan sense ' to immortalize,' especially with poetry. 

64. Cf. xn. 427. 

67. Synod, meeting; see VI. 156. The word has retained its 
ecclesiastical associations. 

73 76. Cf. vi. 60 (where the "ethereal trumpet from on high" 



NOTES. 617 

sounds the signal of march to the hosts of Heaven against Satan and his 
followers), xn. 227 30, and the third Elegy, 60 (Pura triumphali 
personat cethra tuba}. 

The Biblical references are to the giving of the ten commandments 
to Moses on Sinai, Exod. xix. 16 19, and to "the last trump," 
mentioned in the New Testament, e.g. in i Cor. xv. 52. M. qualifies 
(" perhaps ") his suggestion that the trumpet may be the same. The 
whole passage is anticipated in the Nativity Ode, 155 64. 

74. in Oreb. Contrast I. 6, 7, where, as regards the form Oreb, 
not Horeb, Mr Beeching compares the similar case, Ebrew instead 
of Hebrew, in S. A. 1308. 

77. regions, realms of air ; cf. "the airy region thrilling," Nativity 
Ode, 103 ; see vn. 425. 

78. Pope (Cecilia's Day, v.) recollected Milton. 

The amaranth is a type of immortality, because dftdpavTos (*un- 
withering'), and therefore placed by M. in Heaven. See the fine 
passage in in. 353 59, where he tells us that this flower once flourished 
in Eden "by the tree of life," and then, after man's offence, "to 
Heaven removed." Cf. Tennyson, Romney's Remorse : 
"Ah, my white heather only grows in heaven, 
With Milton's amaranth." 

79. Cf. in. 357, 358, note. 

80. Cf. the "sweet societies" of "the saints above" in Lycidas, 

178, 179- 

86. defended, forbidden. 

90. contrite, as always in.M.; cf. "Be penitent, and for thy fault 
contrite," S. A. 502. The accent shows the influence of the Latin. 

91 93. Keightley thought that there was a break in the sense, or 
that some word had been omitted. But the meaning seems to be, 
' I know man's variableness after my influences cease to work in him.' 

93 9 8 - Genesis iii. 22, 23. 

99. Michael had not yet been chosen for the discharge of any 
duty in the action of the poem, as had Gabriel (bk. IV.) and Raphael 
(bk. v.). But he had been mentioned in bk. vi. as playing a great part 
in the battle in Heaven, and it was natural therefore that some share in 
the actual conduct of the story should be assigned to him (Newton). 

Michael's name occurs in both Milton's first lists of dramatis persona; 
(see the Introduction], whereas neither list has Gabriel or Raphael. 

105. remorse, pity; in Shakespeare the usual sense is 'pity, tender- 
ness of heart.' Cf. The Merchant of Venice, IV. i. 20, "show thy 
mercy and remorse." So in i. 605, IV. 109. 



6l8 PARADISE LOST. BOOK XI. 

1 06. denounce, announce, proclaim, with the notion of hostility or 
menace. Cf. 815, and n. 106. 

in. excess, transgression; cf. in. 696. 
11822. Genesis iii. 24; cf. xii. 590 93, 626 36. 
128, 129. The description of the Cherubim accords with the account 
in the vision of Ezekiel (see chaps, i. and x.). For their office as the 
sentinels of Paradise Lost, see p. 68 1. 

double, because the Latin divinity Janus was commonly represented 
with two faces ; cf. Vergil, dZn. vn. 180, Janique bifrontis imago. 
In the Areopagitica M. speaks of "the temple of Janus, with his two 
controversial faces," P. W. II. 96. Janus sometimes appears as quadri- 
frons, i.e. with four faces. 

130 33. Argus, the hundred-eyed monster who was set by Hera 
(Juno) to watch over lo; some of his eyes watched while the others 
rested. Hermes (Mercury) soothed him to sleep with music, and killed 
him. Cf. the fine passage describing the approach of Dulness, at the 
end of The Dunciad: 

"As one by one, at dread Medea's strain, 
The sick'ning stars fade off th' ethereal plain ; 
As Argus' eyes by Hermes' wand opprest, 
Closed one by one to everlasting rest; 
Thus at her felt approach, and secret might, 
Art after art goes out, and all is night." 

Dante describes the eyes of Argus as the pitiless eyes which could keep 
awake longer than others (Purgatorio, xxxil. 64 66). Milton applies 
the story of lo watched by Argus in his treatise Of Reformation in 
England, II. (P. W. II. 391). 

more wakeful than to ; an imitation of the Greek use of a com- 
parative followed by 17 wore with the infinitive in which idiom wore 
is sometimes omitted. 

to drowse charmed, to drowse under the charm of the pipe, as had 
Argus. Cf. the end of the preface to The Doctrine and Discipline of 
Divorce', "the Jews... thought it too much license to follow freely the 
charming pipe of him who sounded and proclaimed liberty and relief to 
all distresses" i.e. Christ ; and P. R. II. 363. 

Arcadian, because "famous Arcady" (Arcades, 28) was the ideal 
poets' land of "pastoral" life; cf. the title of Milton's poem, not to 
mention Sidney's Arcadia. 

pastoral reed ; the shepherd's pipe or syrinx which Hermes was said 
to have invented, after he invented the lyre. The Dauphin in Henry V. 
III. 7. 16 19, in his extravagant praise of his horse, says: "the earth 



NOTES. 619 

sings when he touches it ; the basest horn of his hoof is more musical 
than the pipe of Hermes." 

opiate rod his wand or caduceus, made of olive-wood and entwined 
with two serpents (cf. Troilus and Cressida, n. 3. 13, 14), which con- 
ferred sleep on whomsoever he wished ; described in The Faerie. Qtieene, 
II. 12. 41. Cf. Jonson, Love's Triumph : 

" The rod and serpents of Cyllenius (i.e. Hermes) 

Bring not more peace than these"; 

and Sir Thomas Browne, Christian Morals, n. xiii. : "The Egyptians 
were merciful contrivers, who destroyed their malefactors by asps, 
charming their senses into an invincible sleep, and killing as it were 
with Hermes's rod." 

Keightley notes that opiate is probably a reminiscence of Ovid, 
Metamorphoses i. 716, where the rod is medicata, i.e. steeped in drugs. 
The word does not come elsewhere in M., except in the MS. of Comus, 
696, where "the Lady" calls the magic draught of Comus his helbrewd 
[i.e. Hell-brewed] opiate, for which M. substituted brewd enchauntmenls. 

133 36. meanwhile. This is the last day of the action of P. L., 
which Newton makes to cover eleven days. 

135. The Greek Leucothea, the white or bright (evK6s) goddess, 
was identified by the Romans with their deity Matuta or Mater Matuta, 
the goddess of the dawn. Lucretius, V. 655, speaks of Matuta ushering 
in the dawn ; this office M. transfers to Leucothea (for whom see also 
Comus, 875). 

140. i.e. which feeling (viz. of joy) made him address Eve again. 
But Keightley takes it quite differently 'which feelings of hope and 
joy his words renewed in, brought back to, the mind of Eve.' 

155. Genesis iii. 15 ; see x. 17981, XII. 14851, 23335. 

157. "And Agag said, Surely the bitterness of death is past," 
i Samuel xv. 32. 

159, 1 60. Alluding to Gen. Hi. 20, "And Adam called his wife's 
name Eve ; because she was the mother of all living." Cf. IV. 475, 492 
The name is said to mean ' life. ' 

162. sad demeanour meek-, Milton's favourite word-order; see 
i. 733 (note). 

172. now, i.e. since the time when the judgment was pronounced 
upon Adam, Genesis iii. 17 19. 

174, 175. Newton compares i Henry IV. III. r. 221, 222: 
"The hour before the heavenly-harness'd team 
Begins his golden progress in the east." 

182. subscribed, agreed, assented; the metaphor of signing a 
document. Cf. S. A. 1535. 



62O PARADISE LOST. BOOK XL 

18290. Illustrations of the deterioration in the Universe; see 
x. 651, note, and cf. x. 706 12. 

182 207. In ix. 78284 (see note) Milton makes Nature "give 
signs of woe " when Eve plucks the forbidden fruit ; and when Adam 
eats thereof similar portents ensue, 1000 1004. Here the omens are 
symbolical : the two birds and two beasts represent the human pair ; and 
the direction of their flight " to the eastern gate " foreshadows the 
banishment from Eden. Keightley notes that in Eneid I. 393 Vergil 
makes the number of swans twelve to denote the twelve vessels that had 
escaped from the storm. Wordsworth refers to this passage of Milton 
in his poem The Redbreast and Butterfly. 

183. eclipsed. An eclipse was traditionally of evil omen ; cf. I. 
597. In his History of Britain M. says, "The same year was seen an 
eclipse of the sun in May, followed by a sore pestilence," P. W. v. 287. 
The vessel in Lycidas was "built in the eclipse," 101. 

184 86. Cf. sEneid xil. 247 56, where the eagle, fulvus Jovis 
ales, carries aloft the swan, and lets it fall again the incident being 
regarded as an omen by the armies. 

185. the bird of Jove ; cf. Cymbeline, iv. 2. 348, " I saw Jove's 
bird, the Roman eagle" ; and the same play, V. 4. 113, " Mount, eagle, 
to my palace crystalline " (the speaker being Jupiter). 

stooped, i.e. having swooped down to strike at his prey ; cf. 
Cymbeline, v. 4. 115, "the holy eagle stoop'd," and v. 3. 42. It was a 
technical term in falconry; cf. The Taming of the Shrew, IV. i. 194. 
So in the Essay on Man, in. 53, 54 : 

"Say, will the falcon, stooping from above, 
Smit with her varying plumage, spare the dove?" 

tour; so spelt in the First Ed., and some editors have thought that 
it means ' wheeling motion,' from tour, ' a circuit.' But it seems to me 
more probable that M. meant tower ; it would be an effective descrip- 
tion, by metaphor, of the proverbially lofty flight of the eagle. Cf. 
1} Allegro, 43, where the lark sings " From his watch-0vr in the skies." 
That the spelling of tower is irregular in M. appears from comparison 
of II. 635, where the First Ed. has touring high (said of Satan's flight), 
with P. R. n. 280, where the First Ed. has high towring (said of 
the lark). 

190. eastern gate. Cf. xil. 638, 639, the words of which echo this 
verse. M. describes the gate in iv. 543 48. 

196. too secure, i.e. feeling too certain of. 

203 207. The brilliance is that of the Heavenly host led by 
Michael, which is descending on the western region of Paradise. 

205, 206. " It is not improbable that Milton had in mind the 



NOTES. 621 

frequent scenery of this kind exhibited in the masks of his time" 
(Todd), i.e. to counterfeit the appearance of clouds and similar pheno- 
mena. See the notes on i. 710 17, iv. 768. 

213 15. See Gen. xxxii. i, 2. pavilioned, encamped; cf. 
Milton's paraphrase of Psalm iii. : 

"encamping round about, 
They pitch against me their pavilions" 

216 20. See 2 Kings vi. 13 17. flaming, i.e. with "the 
chariots of fire round about Elisha," the "one man" of line 219. 

219. levied war', seen. 501, note. 

220. war unpr o claim' d. "The severe censure on this makes me 
fancy that Milton hinted at the war with Holland, which broke out in 
1664, when we surprised and took the Dutch Bourdeaux fleet, before 
war was proclaim'd; which the Whigs much exclaimed against" (War- 
burton). 

Hierarch ; the title is applied to Raphael in v. 468. 

227. of us... determine, i.e. make an end of us. 

2 34> 2 35- Raphael is called "the sociable Spirit" in V. 221. 
"Among the angels, the virtue of Raphael is mild and placid, of easy 
condescension arid free communication ; that of Michael is regal and 
lofty, and, as may seem, attentive to the dignity of his own nature" 
(Johnson). 

242 44. Cf. the description in v. 280 85 of the wings of the 
angel Raphael. 

242. i.e. more vivid ("livelier ") than any purple from Melibcea (a 
town on the coast of Thessaly in Magnesia). Vergil mentions the 
purpura Melibcea in SEneid v. 251 ; cf. also Lucretius II. 500. 

grain of Sarra Tyrian purple. Sarra was the old name of Tyre, 
famous for its dyes procured from a shell-fish ; cf. Vergil, Georg. 
II. 506, Ut gemma bibat et Sarrano indormiat ostro. 

243. worn by kings; cf. "regal ornament," v. 280 (note). 

244. Iris had dipt the woof. Iris was the classical goddess of the 
rainbow, and the verse is a poetical way of saying that the vest was 
brilliant as with the hues of a rainbow. M. had used the same fancy in 
Comus, 83, where the Attendant Spirit speaks of his "sky-robes spun 
out of Iris' woof." See, too, the first reading (1645 edition) in the 
Nativity Ode, 143, 144. 

Pope could blend Miltonic passages with great skill ; cf. his 
account of the sylphs or air-spirits in The Rape of the Lock, u. 
6368 : 

" Loose to the wing their airy garments flew, 
Thin glittering textures of the filmy dew, 



622 PARADISE LOST. BOOK XL 

Dipt in the richest tinctttre of the skies, 
Where light disports in ever-mingling dyes, 
While ev'ry beam new transient colours flings, 
Colours that change whene'er they wave their wings." 
With this description cf. P. L. V. 283, 285, 592. See also The Rape 
of the Lock, II. 84. 

247, 248. i.e. the sword (" with huge two-handed sway," vi. 251) 
with which, in the fight against the rebellious angels, Michael en- 
countered and wounded Satan ; see VI. 250 53, note. 

as in a.., zodiac, as though it were one of the constellations contained 
in the zodiac an allusion to the flashing of the sword. This seems to 
me to be the meaning ; cf. the use of zodiac in xu. 255, but for which 
we might, perhaps, interpret it here in the sense * girdle ' (to which the 
sword would be attached). 

249. state, stately bearing. 

250. inclined. Editors show that this literal use is common in 
the Italian writers and occurs in Spenser, e.g. in The Faerie Queene, 

v- 9> 34- 

254. i.e. disappointed of his prey for many days (seizure being 
passive). Keightley noted that the language of the lines is mainly 
legal ; cf. the phrase 'to defeat the law,' Henry V. iv. i. 175, 176, 
andZtew. VIII. n. i. 14. 

259 62. Repeated, almost, from 48, 49, 96 98. 

" It is a decree pronounced solemnly by the Almighty, and certainly 
it would not have become the Angel who was sent to put it in execution, 
to deliver it in any other words than those of the Almighty. And let 
me add, that it was the more proper and necessary to repeat the words 
in this place, as the catastrophe of the poem depends so much upon 
them, and by them the fate of Man is determined, and Paradise is lost " 
(Newton). He shows that the repetition of the words of messages and 
the like is common in Homer. "Jupiter delivers a commission to a 
Dream, the Dream delivers it exactly in the same words to Aga- 
memnon, and Agamemnon repeats it a third time to the Council, 
though it be a tautology of five or six verses together." 

264. gripe, seizure, spasm ; cf. IV. 408, VI. 543. 

267. discovered, revealed. 

retire; the Cambridge MS. shows that in Comus, 376, M. first wrote 
" solitarie sweet retire " (noun), and substituted " sweet retired solitude." 

268 85. Parallels have been noted in Sophocles, Philoctetes 1453 
et seq., and Euripides, Alcestis 244. But speeches of farewell are apt 
to have a family likeness. 

270. native, "for she had commenced her existence in Paradise" 



NOTES. 623 

(Keightley) ; whereas Adam, created elsewhere, was placed in Eden. 
Cf. vin. 300 et seq., and Gen. ii. 7, 8. 

272. i.e. to spend the time granted as a respite from that day. 

275. visitation; properly 'a visit,' here 'the thing visited,' i.e. 
the flowers. Another example of Milton's use of the abstract for the 
concrete, whether actively or passively (as here). 

278. rank, set in order: the metaphor, perhaps, of a general 
inspecting troops. Cf. Arcades, 59, where the Genius of the Wood visits 
his plants " I... Number my ranks, and visit every sprout." 

290 92. Cf. xii. 615 18. The line bears some resemblance to 
the passage in Lyly's Euphues which editors quote in illustration of 
Richard II. I. 3. 275 80, viz. "that every place was a country to 
a wise man, and all parts a palace to a quiet mind" (Plato). There is 
probably a reference in xii. 646 to this scene in Richard II. 

293. damp, depression of spirits. We find the adjective in the 
sense * depressed'; cf. I. 523. So the verb in the Areopagitica, 
"this [i.e. the censorship of books] was it which had damped the 
glory of Italian wits," P. W. II. 82. 

298 300. Cf. S. A. 1565 68, where the Messenger shrinks 
from telling Manoa (the father) the news of Samson's death. 

307. The jingle of sounds, knowing... known, suggests iv. 830, 
and S. A. 1081, 1082. 

309. ^vho all things can. The verb can, ' to know how to,' i.e. 'to 
be able,' was not then, as now, a mere auxiliary. In Shakespeare it 
governs, but rarely, an accusative ; cf. The Two Gentlemen of Verona, n. 

4. 165, "all I can is nothing," and The Phoenix, "the priest... That 
defuncti ve music can. " Perhaps these are accusatives of respect : e.g. 
here the idiom may be ' who is powerful in respect of all things.' 

310. weary. Cf. Horace's use vifaligare^ ' to importune,' Odes I. 
2. 26. 

316, 317. Cf. passages like Psalms civ. 29, Ixvii. See xn. 106 
109, and S. A. 1749. 

325, 326. For Adam the altars would serve as actual reminders (in 
memory), for his descendants as memorials : it is the distinction between 
personal experience and historical tradition. But it seems to me possible 
that the true reading is "in memory and monument," a single phase 
qualified by "to ages." Todd shows that the two words are often 
combined, much in this way, and there are other places in M. where or 
appears to have taken the place of and through some error. Cf. 

5. A. 182, "To visit or bewail"; and again in 545 (" gods or men," 
2nd ed.) and 1653. Here the mistake might have been caused by the 
fact that the two preceding lines, and the following one, begin with the 



624 PARADISE LOST. BOOK XI. 

same letter. Milton's blindness introduces an element of uncertainty 
in questions of text. 

"We find from various parts of the book of Genesis, that the 
patriarchs raised altars, where God had appeared to them. See xi. 7, 
xii. 25. To this custom of the primitive and patriarchal ages Milton 
seems to have alluded" (note in Todd). 

33 2 > 333- Cf. Exodtis xxxiii. 23. Newton thought that 333 might 
be an echo of Statius, Thebais xii. 817, Sed longe sequere et vestigia 
semper adora. 

336 38. Psalm cxxxix. ; Jeremiah xxiii. 24; Acts xvii. 28, 29. 

339. gave... to... rule. Cf. I. 736, III. 243. 

347 5- M - always speaks of Eden as set on a hill ; cf. 282, 283, 
IV. 134 (note). 

356 58. Cf. Daniel x. 14, where the angel says to the prophet, 
" Now I am come to make thee understand what shall befall thy people 
in the latter days: for yet the vision is for many days." The whole 
idea of the vision was probably suggested to Milton by the vision of 
his descendants vouchsafed to ^Eneas in the last book of the sEneid. 

Johnson says : " Of episodes, I think there are only two [in Paradise 
Lost] contained in Raphael's relation [v., vi.] of the war in Heaven, 
and Michael's prophetic account of the changes to happen in this world. 
Both are closely connected with a great action ; one was necessary to 
Adam as a warning, the other as a consolation." Addison had noted 
that the " vision" in bks. xi., XII. is designed to modify the feeling of 
Adam's failure which the close of the poem leaves ; for though Adam 
himself has fallen, yet " he sees his offspring triumphing over his great 
enemy, and himself restored to a happier Paradise." 

The "Mount of Vision" in The Dunciad, in., whence "Bays" (Colley 
Gibber) surveys in a dream the realms of Dulness and her triumphs, is 
one of the most elaborate of the Miltonic parodies in Pope. 

366. mortal passage, passage from mortality; cf. Comus, 10, "after 
this mortal change," i.e. after death. 

367, 368. Similarly M. "made Eve retire upon Raphael's be- 
ginning his conference with Adam" in bk. vni. 40 44 (Thyer). 

369. Cf. VIII. 45277. 

374. obvious, i.e. turned to meet the evil. 

376, 377. Cf. Ezekiel viii. 3, and xl. 2, " In the visions of God 
brought he me into the land of Israel, and set me upon a very high 
mountain." The phrase means 'visions sent by God'; see xii. 121, 
6 1 1. One of Milton's subjects for a tragedy based on British history 
was : " Edwin by vision promis'd the kingdom of Northumberland on 
promise of his conversion..." (Cambridge MSS.). 



NOTES. 625 

380. the amplest ; the First Ed- omits the. 

381 84. that kill. Its name is not mentioned in Scripture. In 
P. X. in. 251 etseq. (the scene of the Temptation), Milton is thought to 
mean Mt Niphates (ill. 742) in Armenia. That passage should be 
compared with the list of names here, where the geographical sweep, 
however, is much vaster. 

3884 1 1 . Many poets have delighted in the enumeration of proper 
names Milton not least. Cf. i. 396411, 58287. Editors note 
that "Tasso, whose Godfrey is no very imperfect model of a regular 
epick poem, has in his fifteenth canto employed thirty or forty stanzas 
together, in a description of this sort; which had no necessary connec- 
tion with his general plan" (Newton). Collins borrowed the trick of 
Oriental names ; cf. his Persian Eclogues, in. and iv. 

388. Strictly Cathay was identical with China, and Cambaluc, its 
capital, was the same as Pekin (390). See X. 292, 293, note. In the 
Areopagitica M. writes Cataic, P. W. n. 69. 

Cambaluc, built by Kublai Khan, was the capital of the Mongol 
Emperors of China, from about 1264 to 1368. The name is a corrup- 
tion of the Mongolian Kaan-Bahgh, < the city of the Khan,' and Pekin 
is still called 'the city of the Khan' by many Asiatic races. The 
name should be written and accented Cdmbdlnc : Cdmbalu, as M. and 
Longfellow have it, was a popular form, where the wrong accent was 
due to the Italian version of Marco Polo's Travels (through which 
mediaeval Europe first heard of Cathay and Cambaluc) ; the French 
(i.e. the original) MSS. of the Travels give the correct accent 
Cambaluc. 

389. Samarkand, in Central Russian Asia ; once the capital of 
Timur (i.e. Temir) whose grave is there. Its earlier name was Mara- 
chanda. It lies about 100 miles from the river Oxus. 

Temir, the great Oriental conqueror, Timur, the subject of Marlowe's 
two tragedies of Tamburlaine ; he lived 1336-1405. Commonly called 
Tamerlane (a corruption of Timur i Leng, ' the lame Timur ') 

390- Payuin, i.e. Pekin, the capital of China. Paquin is the form 
Hexham s Mercator; Heylyn writes it " Pequin or Pagnia." Sinatan- 

the geographer Ptolemy calls the ancient inhabitants of China Since. The 
word appears to be a corruption of Tsm f the title of the great dynasty 
from which the country got its name Tsina (or China). 

391- These names represent India, Lahore being in the Puniaub 
while Agra is the capital of the N.W. provinces. ^P-=Arabic 
Mughal = Mongol. The real founder of the Mughal empire in India 
Akbar the Great (died 1603), made Agra his capital ; later the seat of 
government was transferred to Lahore. The juggler in Jonson's 

40 



626 PARADISE LOST. BOOK XI. 

Masque of Augurs says, in his affected English, that he can show the 
audience "de Tartar cham," and "de groat king of Mogull." 

392. Here the survey has passed to the East Indies, " the 
golden Chersonese " being the peninsula of Malacca, " thought 
by some," says Heylyn, "to be Solomon's Ophir" ; but see 400, 
note. 

393. Ecbatana (as M. writes in P. R. ill. 286), in ancient Media, 
was the summer capital of the kings of Persia down to the Greek 
conquest (i.e. about 330 B.C.), as Susa was their winter residence. 

394. Ispahan, or Isfahan, became the capital of Persia in the reign 
of the Shah Abbas the Great, who ruled 1586 1628. It was very 
celebrated in the i7th cent.; many European merchants and artificers 
settled there. Heylyn (who writes Hispaan] says that the circuit of 
the city-walls was nine miles. 

394> 395- Moscow (then the capital of Russia) is mentioned among 
the Asiatic names because it was "considered as belonging to Asia in 
the early part of the seventeenth century, and so included in the maps 
of Asia of that period " (Masson). One of Milton's last works was a 
Brief History of Moscovia ; the name of the city is there spelt Mosco. 
Ksar is a corruption of Lat. Casar; hence identical with Germ. 
Kaiser. 

Sultan, i.e. of Turkey. Bizance = Byzantium, Constantinople. 

396. Turches fan- born. The Turkish tribe, which founded the 
Ottoman empire, came from Central Asia (i.e. Turchestan), whence 
they were driven by the Mongols early in the I3th century. 

nor could his eye not ken. The vision is directed now to Africa 
first on its eastern coast. 

397. 398. The empire meant is Upper Ethiopia (see IV. 282, note) 
or Abyssinia; Negus, 'king,' was the hereditary title of the monarch of 
the country. Ercoco, now generally spelt Arkeeko, is a port on the Red 
Sea, at the northernmost (i.e. " utmost") point of Abyssinia. 

398. less, i.e. lesser than, inferior to, Abyssinia. 

399. Mombaza (or Mombas} and Melinda are on the east coast of 
Africa, a little north of Zanzibar, Qutloa or Keelwa being a little south 
of it, on a small island. All three were then noted centres of trade, 
chiefly Portuguese. Heylyn speaks of the " commodius haven" of 
Melinda. 

It may have been in Milton's thoughts that this part of the world 
was not without poetical, indeed epic, associations, perhaps better 
known then than now. For Camoens had described the voyage of 
Vasco da Gama up the east coast of Africa, and some of Milton's 
readers would know the Lusiads through the translation by Milton's 



NOTES. 627 

Cambridge contemporary and successor in the post of Latin Secretary, 
Sir Richard Fanshawe. 

400. Sofala ; on the same coast, but further south ; won by the 
Portuguese in 1505, the district of Sofala still forms part of their 
colonial province of Mozambique. M. is alluding to the town of 
Sofala (lying on the island of Chiloane in the estuary of the river 
Sofala) which in the i;th century was famous as a mercantile port. 
Strictly, the name should be accented Sofala, though M. makes 
it Sofala. 

Ophir; whence Solomon's fleet brought gold and precious stones, 
I Kings'. iS, x. n. According to Genesis x. -29, 30, Ophir was in 
southern Arabia, and not on the east side of Africa. One modern theory 
connects it with Abyssinia. Speaking of Sofala, Heylyn says, "This 
Country for its abundance of Gold and Ivry, is by some thought to 
be that Land of Ophir to which Solomon sent" ; he rejects the view, 
adding, " of this opinion Ortelius in his Thesatirtis was the first Author." 
Another incorrect theory identified Ophir with the peninsula of 
Malacca; cf. Josephus, Antiquities^ vin. vi. 4, "Solomon gave this 
command, that they should go... to the land that was of old called 
Ophir, but now the Aurea Chersonesus, which belongs to India, to 
fetch him gold." In Of Reformation M. alludes to the "mines of 
Ophir" as proverbial sources of wealth, P. W. n. 418. Cowley has 
the line, "Though Ophir's starry stones met everywhere her eye" 
(The Garden). The name came to be used as a synonym for pure 
gold; cf. Sir Thomas Browne, Christian Morals^ I. xxviii. : "There 
is dross, alloy, and embasement in all human tempers; and he flieth 
without wings, who thinks to find ophir or pure metal in any." He 
was among those who identified Ophir with Malacca ( Vulgar Errors, 

II. 2). 

401. A glance at the map will show that the states of Congo and 
Angola (Portuguese since the i;th century) are on the west coast of 
Africa, practically on a level with Quiloa. 

402. thence, i.e. still keeping to the west coast. 

The Atlas Mountains are a range in northern Africa, between the 
Great Desert and the Mediterranean, their chief heights being in 
Morocco and Algiers. 

403. 404. The five territories here mentioned formed part of the 
country vaguely called Barbary, the seaboard of which lay along the 
Mediterranean, and westwards was bounded by the Atlantic. There 
is still a small town of Fez in Morocco ; its name, says Heylyn, is an 
Arabic word for gold. Sus, or Susa, is now Tunis. 

Marocco; spelt so in the First Ed., both here and in I. 584. Heylyn 

40 2 



628 PARADISE LOST. BOOK XI. 

mentions a town of Tremisen (with a province of the same name) lying 
inland to the south of Algiers. 

403. Almansor, ' the victorious,' calif of Bagdad ; he reigned 
from 754 to 775 ; his conquests extended over the whole of North 
Africa. 

405. He just glances at Europe "as concentrated all in all in 
Rome " (Masson) of which, and of her empire, there is an elaborate 
description in P. R. iv. 31 85. 

406. in spirit, i.e. not with his eyes, because America was on the 
opposite side of the globe (Newton). 

407. Monteznme; spelt Motezume in the First Ed. The ordinary 
form Montezuma is the Spanish form of the Aztec name Moteuczoma. 
M. is referring to the Emperor Montezuma, subdued by the Spanish 
general Cortes, 1519 20. 

408. Cusco, i.e. Cuzco, in the centre of Peru (the word Cuzco meaning 
'centre'); it was formerly the capital of the empire of the Incas, whose 
last native sovereign, Atahuallpa in the Spanish form, Atabalipa was 
conquered by the Spaniard, Pizarro, 1532 33. 

richer ; in the lines Ad Patrem M. glances (94) at the Periiana 
regna as proverbial for wealth. 

409 n. In the i6th and i7th centuries a popular belief obtained 
that in the north-east of South America there existed a region of fabu- 
lous wealth, termed by the Spanish El Dorado, 'the Golden.' A 
Spaniard named Martinez said that he had been cast adrift on the coast 
of Guiana, and had made his way to a city Manoa, the roofs and walls 
whereof were made of precious metals. It was to discover this region 
that Sir Walter Raleigh ascended the Orinoco in 1585. The belief may 
have originated in the stories brought home by Spanish travellers of the 
riches of their conquests in South America. 

409. unspoiled, i.e. "not yet reached and plundered, like Mexico 
and Peru, by Europeans" (Keightley). 

410. Guiana, between the rivers Amazon and Orinoco ; the greater 
portion is now divided between Venezuela and Brazil. 

great city, i.e. Manoa. Geryon's sons, the Spanish ; Geryon being 
the Spanish king whose oxen Hercules carried off (ALneid vin. 202, 
203). 

411. 412. Newton pointed out that Tasso had made the same arch- 
angel, Michael, perform the same service for Godfrey in Jerusalem 
Delivered, xvm. 93. Other parallels might be cited from Homer and 
Vergil, e.g. JEn. n. 664 66, where Venus clears the mist away for 
Eneas. 

413. promised clearer sight. Cf. Satan's words to Eve, IX. 705 709. 



NOTES. 629 

414 19. Probably M. is thinking of his own blindness. According 
to his nephew Edward Phillips, he damaged his sight by constant use of 
specifics. 

414. euphrasy, the plant ' eye-bright' ; from efypaiveiv, ' to cheer.' 
According to the old doctrine of the Signatures (see the Preface toS.A. 
and cf. Sir Thomas Browne, Vulgar Errors, II. 6), the efficacy of a 
plant or mineral was indicated by its similarity in colour or shape to the 
part of the body diseased : euphrasy has a flower with an eye-like mark : 
hence its use as a remedy for dim sight, which it was thought to clear. 
Cf. Hood's Midsummer Fairies, 114: 

"With fairy euphrasy they purged my eyes 
To let me see their cities in the skies." 

purged', cf. a couplet in Pope's Messiah, 39, 40: 

"He from thick films shall purge the visual ray, 
And on the sightless eyeball pour the day." 

rue, a herb that was supposed to have many valuable qualities, e.g. 
as a specific against venomous bites. Keightley quotes from Gerard's 
Herball (1598) to the effect that rue "if boiled and kept in pickle, like 
samphire, when eaten 'quickeneth the sight,' and also that 'applied with 
honey and the juice of fennell, it is a remedy against dim eyes.'" The 
popular name of rue, viz. "herb of grace" (cf. Hamlet, iv. 5. 181, 182), 
may have been due to the esteem in which the plant was held on account 
of these medicinal properties; but perhaps it was so called as symbolising 
the grace of repentance (i.e. from rue, 'to repent'). 

Metaphors drawn from the eyesight come naturally to Milton 
e.g. "if we will but purge -with sovereign eyesalve that intellectual 
ray which God hath planted in us" (Of Reformation, I.) ; and "some 
eye-brightening electuary of knowledge and foresight" (The Reason of 
Church Government, n.). 

416. Psalm xxxvi. 9. 

418. mental sight-, cf. in. 5155, where M. contrasts the light 
of the eyes with that of the soul. The blind Samson was "with 
inward eyes illuminated," S. A. 1689. See the Appendix, pp. 682, 683, 
on Milton's blindness. 

41922. Daniel -x.. 8; Revelation i. 17. 

427. sinned thy sin-, the expression is Scriptural ; cf. Exodus xxxii. 
30; i John v. 16 (Newton). 

429 47. The story of Cain and Abel, Genesis iv. 

430, 431. Genesis iv. 2. tilth, tilled land; commonly tilth is 
active in sense =' husbandry, cultivation.' Cf. Cotgrave's definition, 
" labouring, ploughing, or breaking up of the ground." 

433. sord a dialect form of sward, A.S. sweard, a skin or 



630 PARADISE LOST. BOOK XI. 

surface.' In The Winter's Tale, iv. 4. 157, the First Folio prints 
greene-sord. Newton restored the proper reading, sord, for which sod 
had been substituted in some texts (Todd). 

436. tmculledy not carefully picked out ; contrast 438. 

439. inwards, the inward parts; used so in Othello, II. i. 306. 

441, 442. Gen. iv. 4 only says, "And the Lord had respect unto 
Abel and to his offering " ; but the verse is usually explained as M. has 
interpreted it. Cf. Gideon's offering, Judges vi. 21 ; Elijah's, i Kings 
xviii. 38; Solomon's, 2 Chron. vii. i : each was "consumed" with lire 
from heaven, in sign of acceptance. 

448, 449. " This is very properly made the first vision, and is so 
much enlarged upon, as it is of Adam's immediate descendants" 
(Newton). 

457. fact, deed; cf. ix. 928. 

458, 459. Alluding to Hebrews xi. 4. 

47793. This notion of the "cave" of Death, crowded with 
personified shapes of evil and disease, is purely conventional : many 
such pictures have been painted by poets. See n. 959 67. 

We may remember that the fourth draft (see Introduction) of 
Paradise Lost contained "a mask of all the evils of this world"; 
some of the diseases here mentioned might have been among them. 
Gray's sombre spirit inclined towards these gloomy abstractions, and 
the Miltonic influence is strongly felt in the last stanzas of his Eton 
Ode; cf. especially lines 61 70 and Si 90; also The Progress of 
Poesy, 4245. 

479. a lazar-house', a hospital for lepers, lazar coming from the 
name of the beggar in Luke xvi. 20. The traveller Hentzner, who 
visited England in Elizabeth's reign, noted that the English suffered 
much from leprosy, and that there were many ' lazar-houses.' 

485 87. Three lines not in the First Ed. ; inserted in the 
Second, "to swell the horrour of the description.... Pope says they 
are three admirable lines" (Newton). 

485. phrenzy, commonly spelt so in M. 

486 88. moon-struck madness, i.e. lunacy, so called from the 
supposed effect of the moon (Lat. luna) in causing or increasing 
madness. Cf. Othello, V. 2. 109. atrophy, Gk. drpoQia, a disease in 
which the body wastes away through not being nourished by the food 
taken (Gk. d-, 'not,' and rptQeiv, 'to nourish'). pining= causing to 
pine, i.e. active in sense, as in Xii. 77. marasmus, the disease of con- 
sumption; Gk. papaa fj.6s, 'a wasting, withering.' 

491. The " dreadful dart " of Death is mentioned in n. 672, 786. 

492. oft invoked', cf. Sophocles, Philoctetes 797, 798 : 



NOTES. 631 



w davare, da-vare, TTWS del 
OVT(S) Kar rjj.ap ov duvet 
and Horace, Odes n. 18. 3840. 

shook; following its object dart. "I hate inversions, but this 
line is strong" (Tennyson). He remarked on the fine effect of the 
monosyllable shook and the pause after it. 

494. deform= :Lat. deformis, ' hideous, unsightly' ; cf. IT. 706. The 
Centitry Dictionary quotes Wyclif, Gen. xli. 19, " other seuen oxen... 
defourme and leene." In S. A. 699 we find deformed^ ' deforming, ' 
'that which makes unsightly.' 

496, 497. The couplet, as editors note, is made up of reminiscences 
of Shakespeare. Cf. Macbeth, v. 8. 3032 : 

"Though Birnam wood be come to Dunsinane, 
And thou opposed, being of no woman born, 
Yet I will try the last," 
and the same scene, 17, 18: 

"Accursed be that tongue that tells me so, 

For it hath cow'd my better part of man  " 
So in Henry V. IV. 6. 28 32 : 

"The pretty and sweet manner of it forced 
Those waters from me which I would have stopp'd ; 
But I had not so much of man in me, 
And all my mother came into mine eyes 
And gave me tip to tears" 

Cf. too the words of Laertes over Ophelia's dead body (Hamlet, IV. 7. 
18690). 

504 506. M. has in mind Seneca's Vitam nemo acciperet, si dare fur 
scientibus. Cf. Sir Thomas Browne, Christian Morals, in. xxv. : 
"When the Stoic said that life would not be accepted, if it were offered 
unto such as knew it, he spoke too meanly of that state of being which 
placeth us in the form of men." 

So Drummond in A Cypress Grove: "O! who, if before he had a 
being he could have knowledge of the manifold miseries of it, would 
enter this woeful hospital of the world, and accept of life upon such 
hard conditions?" (Works, II. 252). 

508, 509. Genesis i. 26, " And God said, Let us make man in our 
image, after our likeness." erect ; see VII. 506 10, note. 

518, 519. his image, i.e. Appetite's. Eve's main inducement (he 
says) to eat of the fruit was appetite ; this agrees with the account in 
ix. 740, 741. 

531. Alluding to the maxim of the ancients, wdtv &yav ne qitid 
minis. The praises of a temperate life are often on Milton's lips. The 



632 PARADISE LOST. BOOK XI. 

theme inspires a fine passage in Comus, 762 79. In  Penseroso, 46, 
he invokes " Spare Fast, that oft with gods doth diet " ; and in the sixth 
Elegy (59, 60), tells Diodati that the poet who would handle grave 
matters and rival Homer must be ascetic in his life (tile quidem parce... 
vivat). No doubt, in the present passage, as in S. A. 55357, M. is 
thinking of his own habits. A "temperate man," says Aubrey; and 
again: "very healthy and free from all diseases... till towards his latter 
end " (Life of M.). 

535 37- Perhaps a reminiscence, as Newton thought, of Cicero, 
De Senectute 1 9, quasi poma ex arboribus, cruda si sunt, vix evellun- 
tur, si matura et cocta, decidunt, sic vitam adulescentibus vis aufert, 
senibtis maturitas. 

j^2 46". M. is probably glancing at his own ill-health in later life. 
There is a similar allusion in vi. 462 64, and S. A. 698700. " He 
died of the gowt struck in" (Aubrey). Cf. Johnson's Life of M. 
Aubrey says that he bore his suffering very cheerfully. 

544. Todd quotes a passage in which Burton in the Anatomy of 
Melancholy reckons the chief cause of melancholy to be "old age, 
which, being cold and dry, and of the same quality as Melancholy is, 
must needs cause it, by diminution of spirits and substance." M. often 
refers to the old physiology of the four " humours," of which melancholy 
(the black bile) was one ; see Comus, 809, 810, S. A. 600. 

55* 55^. The First Ed. had, somewhat abruptly, "Of rendering up. 
Michael to him repli'd." There is an allusion here iojob xiv. 14. 

553> 554- " My father often quoted these lines, ' He that loveth his 
life . . . ' " (Life of Tennyson). 

permit to Heaven ; cf. Horace's Permitte divis cetera Odes I. 9. 9. 

556 73. Referring to the descendants of Cain ; see Gen. iv. ?o 
22. In 560 "who moved" means Jubal, "the father of all such as 
handle the harp and organ," Gen. iv. 21. See Dryden's Song for 
Sf Cecilids Day, 16 24, and Marvell's Music's Empire, the last stanza 
of which contains, I cannot help thinking, an allusion to Milton. 

560. The organ was Milton's favourite instrument; he had been 
taught to play it by his father. See the accurate account of its 
mechanism in I. 707, 708. 

561. volant touch. Todd aptly compared Dryden's lines in 
Alexanders Feast'. 

"Timotheus, plac'd on high 
Amid the tuneful quire, 

With flying fingers touch'd the lyre ; 

The trembling notes ascend the sky, 
And heavenly joys inspire." 



NOTES. 633 

We may add Thomson's lines in The Castle of Indolence, I. 40, on an 

^olian harp : 

"From which, with airy flying fingers light, 
Beyond each mortal touch the most refined, 
The god of winds drew sounds of deep delight, 
Whence, with just cause, the harp of yEolus it hight." 

Cf. too Dryden. sEneid, vi. 879, 880, and Collins, The Passions, 88, 89. 

562. instinct, instinctively. 

563. transverse, across, i.e. across the keys of the instrument. 
fugue. In the tractate On Education a ' ' skilful organist plies his 

grave and fancied descant [cf. IV. 603] in lofty fuges," P. W. III. 476. 
A fugue (Ital. fuga, 'a flight ') is a form of musical composition. The 
whole passage has often been cited as a striking instance of Milton's 
accuracy in the use of technical terms of music. Indeed, the MSS. of 
his early poems show that he was conscious of a tendency to carry this 
use too far. Thus an earlier draft of the Ode At a Solemn Music had, 
in place of the existing lines 19, 20, the curiously technical couplet : 
"by leaving out those harsh chromatick Jarres 

of sin that all our musick marres." 

Again, in Comus, 243, comparison of the MSS. shows that he first wrote 
"And hold a counterpoint to all heavns harmonies" afterwards 
changed to "And give resounding grace etc." 

564. one wio, i.e. Tubal-Cain, "an instructor of every artificer in 
brass and iron," Gen. iv. 22. 

573. i.e. cast in moulds ("fusil"), or carved. 

573 9 2 - Referring to the descendants of Seth. According to 
Jewish tradition they dwelt in the mountains near to Paradise (i.e. ' ' on 
the hither side "), whereas Cain went out to " the east of Eden," Gen. 
iv. 1 6. They are said by Josephus and other writers to have been 
addicted to the study of physics and astronomy ; cf. the Antiquities, I. 
ii. 3, "They (i.e. the Sethites) were the inventors of that peculiar 
sort of wisdom which is concerned with the heavenly bodies, and 
their order." This tradition M. glances at in 578. 

581, 582. Genesis vi. i, 2. 

582 97. This passage may be compared with P. R. n. 153 71, 
and 362 65. "Milton seems to have taken [these particulars] from 
the Oriental writers" (Newton). 

584. In I. 449 the Syrian women lament for Adonis " in amorous 
ditties." 

586, 587. M. repeats himself in P. R. n. 161, 162 : 
" SkilPd to retire, and, in retiring, draw 
Hearts after them tangled in amorous nets." 



G34 PARADISE LOST. BOOK XI. 

In his first Elegy, 60, he had spoken of the Aurea qiuz fallax retia 
tendit Amor. Bowie notes that Ariosto has the phrase amoroso, rete 
(Orlando Furioso, I. 12); probably M. remembered it; he knew 
Ariosto's work well. There may be a reminiscence of Milton in 
Tennyson's Madeline : 

"all my heart entanglest 
In a golden-netted smile." 

Milton's influence is almost as conspicuous in Tennyson's early 
poems as in Keats. 

587. fast misprinted first in a number of the early iSth century 
editions (Todd). 

588, 589. The star Hesperus is called stella Veneris. Cf. iv. 605, 
vin. 519, 520. 

591. Hymen, the classical god of marriage; cf. the invocation in 
V 'Allegro, 125, 126 : 

"There let Hymen oft appear 

In saffron robe, with taper clear," 

i.e. the "nuptial torch" (590), which, strictly, had to be pine-wood. 
Cf. the Masque of Hymen, " entered Hymen... in his right hand a torch 
of pine-tree," where, in the note, Ben Jonson cites Ovid Expectet 
puros pinea tceda dies. See also Milton's Epitaph on the Marchioness of 
Winchester, 17 20. The colouring here (590 92) is classical; editors 
quote various parallels from the classics. 

595. symphonies, harmonious sounds. The word, which now 
signifies a special form of musical composition, in M. means no more 
than 'harmony' (Gk. avuQuvia.}. Cf. Cotgrave, "Symphonic: Har- 
mony, tunable singing," and Bullokar (1616), "Symphonic, consent in 

isick." 

607,608. the tents of wickedness. Psalm Ixxxiv. 10. 

6 1*. i.e. acknowledged none of his gifts ; for the position of none, 
cf. v. 538. So sometimes in Shakespeare. Cf. Twelfth Night, in. 4. 
262, " satisfaction can be none but by pangs of death. " 

614. Michael has just said that Cain's descendants would beget a 
beauteou? race : here he appeals to the testimony of Adam's own eyes ; 
the " female troop " are that race. 

620. troll ; properly to roll ' ; cf. the phrase ' to troll the bowl, ' i. e. 
to circulate it (in the game of bowls). Keightley quotes from Golding's 
translation of Ovid's Metamorphoses x. 664, "Neptune's imp... trolled 
down at one side of the way an apple." But commonly troll was used 
in phrases like 'troll a catch' (in music) ; cf. The Tempest, ill. 2. 126, 
" Let us be jocund : will you troll the catch?" and Jonson, Every Man 
in his Humour, I. 2, "I'll troll ballads." The notion there is ' to run 



NOTES. 635 

over glibly, fluently.' Probably, therefore, M. means that these "god- 
desses " are voluble of speech. 

621 25. "The sons of God saw the daughters of men that they 
were fair," Gen. vi. 2. " It is now generally agreed, that this passage 
is to be understood of the sons of Seth " (Newton). See V. 447, note. 

624. trains, snares, wiles. 

625 27. In Milton, as in Shakespeare, the quibbling use of words 
often expresses grim sarcasm : these lines contain two instances in point 
"swim" and "world." See also 756, 757. Todd noted that the 
figurative sense of swim =' revel ' was not uncommon; cf. ix. 1009, 
note. 

627. Cf. IX. u, "That brought into this world a world of woe." 
Phrases like "a world of care" (Richard III. ill. 7. 223), "world of 
wealth" (Henry VI 1L III. 2. 211), meaning ' much of,' are frequent in 
Shakespeare. 

631. paths indirect', cf. 2 Henry IV. IV. 5. 18486: 

"God knows, my son, 

By what by-paths and indirect crook'd ways 
I met this crown." 
indirect ; then a strong word ' wrong, unfair.* 

632, 633. An expression of Milton's own opinion. Unhappy in 
his first marriage, which led to the composition of his bitter pamphlets 
on Divorce, and in the ill-behaviour of his daughters, he seldom let 
pass an opportunity for invective against women. See IX. 377, 823, 
notes, and S. A. passim (especially 1010 60). 

There is probably a quibble here, an old derivation of woman 
being woe to man ! 

635, 636. Again M. himself is the speaker. His conception of the 
relative position of man and woman is summed up in a sentence that 
occurs more than once in his prose-works "woman was made for 
man." Cf. IV. 295 99, note. 

638 73 Obviously modelled on the description of the shield of 
Achilles, Iliad xvin. 478 et seq. Cf. the use that Vergil makes of the 
same passage in ALneid vill. 608 731, describing the shield which 
Venus brings to ^Eneas, figured with representations of the greatest 
scenes in the history of Rome. 

642. bold emprise. Todd notes that the phrase occurs in Comus, 
610, and often in Spenser; an echo, perhaps, of the first line of Ariosto, 
Orlando furioso: " Le cortesie, 1'audaci imprese, io canto." 

643. Repeated from II. 531, "Part curb their fiery steeds," where 
M. is describing (cf. Iliad II. 773, JEneid vi. 642) the " heroic games " 
of the rebellious angels after the Council at Pandemonium. 



636 PARADISE LOST. BOOK XI. 

646 55. Editors compare Iliad xvin. 527 et seq. 

651. makes. The First Ed. has tacks ; perhaps a misprint. M. 
never uses the word ; it would scarce give any sense here. 

660,661. Clearly from Iliad xvm. 503 506. haralds, i.e. heralds. 
For councils (in Scripture) held "in the city-gates," see Genesis xxxiv. 
20. 

665. one rising, i.e. Enoch, of middle age ; Enoch was 365 years 
old when translated to Heaven "i.e. not half the full age attributed 
to the oldest patriarchs " (Masson). 

669. exploded, hissed. 

672. sword-law. "This was probably intended by the poet as 
a reflection on the dangerous doctrine of his antagonist, Hobbes ; who 
wished to establish the false notion, that right is founded on might" 
(Todd). He compares Richard III. v. 3. 311, "Our strong arms be 
our conscience, swords our law." 

684. Milton's own "ill-mated" first marriage had strongly in- 
fluenced his life and opinions ; see X. 898 906, notes. 

687, 688. prodigious; cf. II. 624, 625. The reference is to Gen. 
vi. 4, " There were giants in the earth in those days." 

690. valour... virtue', a glance at the fact that primarily virtue 
meant ' valour,' Lat. virtus. 

694, 695. Keeping the punctuation of the original, I think that the 
sense is ' and to be styled great conquerors shall be held the highest pitch 
of triumph for glorious deeds accomplished.' This makes of triumph 
depend on highest pitch understood from 693, and0r glory done depend 
on of triumph : triumph signifying the honour which a man gets in 
return for glorious achievements. To "do glory " is a curious phrase in 
this sense Shakespeare uses it differently in Sonnet 132 and Bentley 
proposed ' for glory won.' 

Newton interprets the passage : ' To overcome shall be held the 

highest pitch of glory, and shall be done for glory of triumph, to be 
(i.e. so as to be) styled great conquerors.' But the ellipse shall be is 
awkward. 

698, 699. Cf. the distinction suggested in Lycidas, 70 84, between 
earthly fame and true Heavenly fame. 

700 709. Genesis v. ; Jude 14, 15. 

706. A variation on in. 522. He assumes that Enoch's translation 
to Heaven resembled that of Elijah (2 Kings ii. n). Cf. P. R. II. 

16, 17, and his first Epigram, Qualiter ille Liquit I'drdanios turbine 

rapt us agros. 

708. climes, regions ; a common use in M. Cf. I. 242. 

715. luxury, a much stronger word then than now. In Shake- 



NOTES. 637 

speare it always means 'lust, lasciviousness ' ; so luxttrious =' lustful' ; 
cf. Of Information, II., " the luxurious and ribald feasts of Baal-peor." 
Luxuna and luxuriosus were used thus in the Latin of the Church 
Fathers, and lussuria by Dante ; cf. the Inferno, V. 55. He speaks of 
Cleopatras lussuriosa (63). 

717. fair-, cf. IX. 606, note. 

719. reverend sire ', Lycidas ,103. 

723. triumphs, public shows or festivities. 

7 2 3 2 5- See i Peter iii. 19, 20. Dunster observed that in several 
details of the account of Noah in these lines M. has followed the 
Antiquities of Josephus, bk. I. chap. iii. 

728 53. Genesis vi., vii. There are occasional echoes in the 

passage of Ovid's description of the Deluge {Metamorphoses I.) ; e.g. 

"sea without shore " in 750 suggests Ovid's deerant qiioqite litoraponto, 

I. 292. Thomson followed Milton; cf. Spring (describing the Deluge) : 

"A shoreless ocean tumbled round the globe." 

738. the south-wind', the precursor of rain. 

743. "deling may be thought too mean a word in poetry; but 
Milton had a view to its derivation from calum, cielo (Italian), 'heaven'" 
(Richardson). The same consideration probably had determined its use 
by other poets. 

752. stabled, had their lairs; cf. Comus, 534, "stabled wolves," 
i.e. wolves in their haunts. From Lat. stabtdum 'aJxS as in stabula 
altaferarum, sEneidvi. 179. 

753. bottom, vessel; cf. Twelfth Night, v. i. 60, "With the most 
noble bottom of our fleet"; and The Merchant of Venice, I. i. 42, 
"My ventures are not in one bottom trusted." 

763, 764. A common sentiment. Cf. Comus, 362, "What need 
a man forestall his date of grief?"; or Landor, Gebir, VI. : 
"Oh! seek not destined evils to divine, 
Found out at last too soon." 

765, 766. Matthew vi. 34, " Sufficient unto the day is the evil there- 
of." dispensed, i.e. distributed so as to be the burden. 

772. evil. ..sure. For the omission of the preposition of, cf. S. A. 
1408. 

773> 774' neither... and. Rightly explained by Newton as an imi- 
tation of the Latin idiom neque...et ('not only not. ..but also'). He 
quoted from Cicero, De Oratort homo neque meo judicio stultus, et suo 
valde sapiens. Exactly parallel is the sentence cited by Todd from The 
Doctrine and Discipline of Divorce, " the Jews, who were neither won 
with the austerity of John the Baptist, and thought it too etc." 

779. For wander as a transitive verb cf. P. R. II. 246. So roam 
in i. 521, and rove in Comus, 60. 



638 PARADISE LOST. BOOK XI. 

798, 799. Milton's favourite idea (for which he might have quoted 
the authority of Aristotle), that in the history of every nation moral 
corruption and loss of political liberty go hand in hand : that a people 
which is corrupt ceases to care for freedom. Cf. S. A. 268 70: 
" But what more oft in nations grown corrupt, 
And by their vices brought to servitude, 
Than to love bondage more than liberty!" 

The thought is often insisted upon in his prose-works. See II. 25557, 
note, and xn. 90 et seq. 

800. For the accent, contest, cf. IV. 872, S. A. 461, 865. 

801 805. Interpreted by most editors as a political reference : 
many Puritans, as M. knew, had silently acquiesced in the Restoration. 
Cf. his covert attack in S. A. 146466 on the Presbyterians. " Hypo- 
crisy Milton, in various parts of his poem, has branded as the most 
abominable of crimes" (Dunster). 

804, 805. The point whereon Comus and " the Lady" dispute 
(710-80). 

808 1 8. A picture of Milton himself in the lonely last years of 
his life ; perhaps he meant it as such. The " dark age " (from his point 
of view) represented that in which the Restoration had been brought 
about; the "wicked ways" were those of the courtiers of Charles II.; 
the " wrath to come " stood for the second Revolution which he foretold 
more plainly in S. A. See v. 899, vii. 16, 27 (notes). 

821. devote ; cf. in. 208. An entry in the Cambridge MSS. shows 
that M. contemplated writing a "tragedy" on "The flood." 

823. select, set aside. 

824. cataracts. In Gen. vii. u, the Heb. word rendered by 
windows in the A. V. (or food-gates, margin) is translated cara5pdcrcu 
in the Septuagint, cataracts in the Vulgate. The word is appropriate 
of tropical rain and water-spouts (Newton). 

82935. It was a generally held opinion that Paradise was ob- 
literated by the Flood ; but the particular explanation here given of its 
removal appears to be of Milton's own invention. 

831. horned, branching into horns, i.e. channels, as a river does 
when it meets some obstacle. Probably we get the same notion in the 
Lat. tauriformis as applied to rivers ; cf. Horace's tauriformis Aufidus, 
Odes iv. 14. 25, and Vergil, Georg. IV. 371, 372. Todd noted that the 
same phrase horned flood, in the same sense, occurs in Ben Jonson, 
Fox, in. 7, and Browne, Britannia's Pastorals, II. 5 (of which work 
Milton's own annotated copy survives. See n. 583, note). 

833. Probably the Euphrates is meant " the great river, the river 
Euphrates," Gen. xv. 18. The Tigris is less likely, the. ..Gulf, i.e. the 
Persian Gulf; called "the Persian bay," P. R. III. 273. 



NOTES. 639 

835. ores, a kind of whale ; Ben Jonson speaks of " Proteus' herds, 
and Neptune's ores " in the Masque of Neptune's Triumph. 

clang; used, like Lat. clangor, of the cries of birds in vii. 422. 

840. ' To kuir is ' to toss or drive on the water, like the hull of a 
ship without sails.' Cf. Gervase Markham's Sir Richard Grinuile, 
"Then casts he Anchor hulling on the maine" ; and Twelfth Nigit, I. 
5. 217, "Will you hoist sail, sir?. ..No, I am to hull here a little 
longer." Sir Thomas Browne may have remembered Milton when he 
wrote : "In this virtuous voyage of thy life hull not about like the ark, 
without the use of rudder, mast, or sail, and bound for no port" 
(Christian Morals, I. i.). 

842 49. Cf. the account in vii. 285 306 of the subsidence of 
the waters after the Creation of the earth. 

"The circumstances [here] are few, but selected with great judg- 
ment. In this respect, Milton greatly excels the Italians, who are 
generally too prolix in their descriptions, and think they have never 
said enough whilst any thing remains unsaid " (Thyer). 

842. "And God made a wind to pass over the earth, and the 
waters asswaged," Gen. viii. i. M. would naturally select the north as 
the parching, drying wind; see n. 489, 594, 595, notes; cf. Proverbs 
xxv. 23. He may, too, have recollected Ovid's account of the re- 
appearance of the earth, nimbis Aquilone remotis (Newton). 

The north-east is typically the sky-clearing wind of poetry; cf. 
Dante, Paradise, xxvni. 7984. 

846. their; referring to wave. M. may have dictated waves, or 
treated wave as a collective noun (and so avoided writing its). 

84867. There are continual references to Genesis viii. 

85 1. "And the ark rested. . .upon the mountains of Ararat," Genesis 
viii. 4. Cf. Josephus, "After this the ark rested on the top of a certain 
mountain in Armenia," A ntiquities, I. iii. 5. 

858. his. " In Gen. viii. 9 the dove is feminine " (Keightley). 

866. three, red, yellow and blue (according to the belief then 
held) ; cf. 879. Now the rainbow is resolved into seven colours. 

listed, striped, streaked; from list, a strip (of cloth, etc.). Cf. 
Tennyson, Vivien, "Trees that shone white-listed through the gloom." 

867. covenant; Genesis ix. n 17. "The compact that God 
made with Noah, that the world never shall be drowned again," 
Paradiso, xn. 17, 18. 

870. thou, -Mho. In the First Ed. thou that. 

880, 88 1. Some editors place a note of interrogation at the end of 
879, and explain 880, 881 thus "are they (i.e. the streaks) distended 
...or do they serve?" The advantage of this is that it supplies a direct 
alternative to "or serve"; on the other hand the ellipse in 880 is 



640 PARADISE LOST. BOOK XII. 

awkward, and the line sounds, I think, more natural if taken as a 
statement, not as a question, from Adam. * What (he asks) mean those 
streaks spread over the heaven ? is it that they serve to bind ? etc. ' 
The second question is a kind of after-thought, introduced by or, 
though no regular alternative has preceded. 

as the brow. The notion is that of a knitted brow relaxing its 
wrinkled lines, i.e. the frown, expressive of anger or thought. M. uses 
the same idea to suggest the influence of music ; cf.  Pen. 55 58 : 
' ' And the mute Silence hist along, 
'Less Philomel will deign a song, 
In her saddest sweetest plight, 
Smoothing the rugged brow of Night " ; 
and>. R. II. 163, 164: 

"Such object hath the power to soften and tame 
Severest temper, smoothe the rugged'st brow" 
(rugged 'in either case meaning ' wrinkled '). 

886 901. A combination of Scriptural passages. Cf. Gen. vi. 6, 
9, n, 12; viii. 22 ; ix. n 17 ; 2 Peter iii. 12, 13. late, lately. 
889. Cf. vn. 453, " each in their kind." 

895. The Scriptural phrase man a-nd beast (Psalm xxxvi. 6, 
Jeremiah xxi. 6) includes the birds (Pearce). 



BOOK XII. 

i 5. These five lines were added in the Second Ed., as a "transi- 
tion," when bk. x. (of the First Ed.) was divided into the present xi. 
xii. ; just as, at the same time, the first three verses of vm. were inserted, 
when VII. (of the First Ed.) was divided into what are now vn. vm. 
In the First Ed. the line in Michael's speech, " Both Heaven and Earth 
etc.," which forms the close of the present xi., was followed, without 
any break, by " Thus thou hast seen" (6). 

i. bates; printed so in the First Ed., and the sense must be 
'slackens,' i.e. abates, his course. Some editors read baits, which is 
used in S. A. 1538 ; there, however, the word is spelt baits in the 
First Ed. an argument against altering the text here. 

The word bait, ' to stop on a journey for refreshment ' (cognate with 
bite), is not very dignified now, but it may not have been open to this 
objection in Milton's time. Thus Sidney calls sleep " The baiting-place 
of wit, the balm of woe"; and Donne, in his Progress of the Soul, 
describing the progress of a soul to Heaven, says : " She stays not in 



NOTES. 641 

the Air... she baits not at the Moon," i.e. does not stop there. Here it 
suits the metaphor of the whole line. 

8 10. Till then all that Adam saw appeared in visions (xi. 377). 

13 24. A picture of the world in the 'Silver Age when the 
government was patriarchal ("under paternal rule"); that of iron soon 
(24) begins (Richardson). 

18. labouring, cultivating. Used actively in S. A. 1298, with the 
sense ' causing to labour.' As a transitive verb in Shakespeare it means 
1 to effect by labour' ; cf. " he would labour my delivery," Richard III. 
i. 4 . 253. 

24. one, i.e. Nimrod. In what follows M. is giving expression to 
his own republican feelings, and his dislike of a monarchy. Nimrod, 
he says, was the first to claim sovereign power over his fellow-men : 
and then Nimrod is depicted in the most unfavourable light, so that we 
may infer that the institution (i.e. monarchy) which had such an evil 
originator must be itself evil. 

Milton's Common-place Book (see IX. 200), among some remarks 
on the origin of monarchy, has the entries : 

"The Lordly Monarchy first among men. In Assyria under the 
power of Nimrod called a great Hunter, an Hebraisme for a Great 
Theife. Before his time was no sovereign." (Camden Society's 2nd 
ed., p. 42.) 

25. of proud, ambitious heart. In the Purgatorio, XII. 34 36, 
Nimrod is classed with Satan as a type of pride. 

28. dispossess. These compounds with dis~ as a negative prefix, 
implying ' to deprive of,' are very common in M. ; cf. dispeople, dis- 
exercise, disenthrone (n. 229). 

30 35. The description of Nimrod in Gen. x. 9, " He was a mighty 
hunter before the LORD," has been explained in two ways : literally, ac- 
cording to the obvious sense of the English rendering ; figuratively, as 
meaning that he was a great conqueror ; this is implied by the preceding 
verse, which speaks of his beginning to found an empire, while the 
Hebrew translated "hunter" would appear, from other passages, to 
have been applicable to a warrior making raids on his enemies. It is 
under the second aspect that M. regards Nimrod as a tyrannous ruler 
extending his empire and persecuting all who resisted : men, not beasts, 
were his prey. See the entries quoted above and Eikonoklastes, n : 
"the bishops could have told him [Charles I.] that Nimrod, the first 
that hunted after faction, is reputed by ancient tradition the first that 
founded monarchy" (P. W. I. 405). Compare the picture of him that 
Josephus draws: "a bold man, and of great strength of hand. ...He 
changed the government into a tyranny, seeing no other way of turning 

P. L. 41 



642 PARADISE LOST. BOOK XII. 

men from the fear of God, but to bring them into a constant depen- 
dence upon his own power," Antiquities, I. iv. i. I think that in the 
whole of this passage concerning Nimrod and the Tower of Babel 
Milton had Josephus' narrative in his mind. Dryden makes Nimrod 
the first of great persecutors ; cf. The Hind and the Panther, I. 
282, 283: 

"Thus persecution rose, and farther space 

Produced the mighty hunter of his race." 
Similarly Pope {Windsor Forest, 61, 62) : 

"Proud Nimrod first the bloody chase began, 

A mighty hunter, and his prey was man." 

One of the chieftains of Diabolus in The Holy War (end) is "Captain 
Nimrod," leader of "the Tyrannical " band. 

34. M. glances at the two interpretations which have been given 
of the phrase "before the Lord": (i) 'in defiance of God,' which is 
certainly in accordance with Josephus' account ; (2) 'under God,' i.e. 
"as usurping all authority to himself next under God, and claiming 
ijure divino" (Newton), just as in Milton's own day "the divine right 
of kings" had been put forward so strongly. The second view seems 
very improbable. 

36. Alluding to the incorrect notion that Nimrod is connected 
with the Heb. root m&rad, 'to rebel.' More probably, the name is 
Assyrian. Of course, it suits Milton's sarcastic purpose to imply that 
the first king in history was himself but a rebel. It is as though he 
were flinging back the charge so often brought against his own political 
party, that they were rebellious in their resistance to Charles I. 

38 62. Cf. the account of the building of the Tower of Babel in 
Gen. xi. 2 9. M. follows the original very closely. The Bible does 
not directly associate Nimrod with the building of the Tower of Babel ; 
it only states (Gen. x. 10) that Babel was one of his capitals. The view 
which M. has followed here (as in the last chapter of Eikonoklastcs} is 
a later belief, given by Josephus (Antiquities, I. iv. 2) ; Dante has it in 
the Inferno, xxxi., Purgatorio, XI I., and Paradiso, XXVI. The tradition 
of Nimrod's connection with Babel or Babylon survives in the name of 
the great temple-tower Birs-Nimrud, remains of which still exist. 

41, 42. Cf. Josephus (speaking of the Tower), "it was built of 
burnt brick, cemented together with mortar, made of bitumen, that it 
might not be liable to admit water," Antiquities, I. iv. 3. 

the plain, i.e. in Mesopotamia, bordered by the Euphrates. 

bituminous. The mineral pitch called bitumen (or asphalt} abounded 
in Babylonia, and was employed, it is thought, in the buildings of the 
city of Babylon. See the note on " asphaltic slime," X* 298. 

42. the mouth of Hell. " This ' bituminous gurge ' the poet calls 



NOTES. 643 

'the mouth of hell,' not strictly speaking, but by the same sort of figure 
by which the ancient poets called Taenarus or Avernus the jaws and 
gate of Hell. Vergil, Georg. IV. 467, Tienarias etiam fauces, ala ostia 
Ditis" Newton. Cf. , too, fauces graveolentis Averni (in the passage 
describing the descent of ^Eneas to Hades), ALn. vi. 201. 

52, 53. Cf. 2 Chronicles xviii. 11. See II. 190, 191, note. 

55. Sylvester (Du Bartas) describes the confusion of Tongues as 
"a jangling noise." Dante puts unintelligible words in Nimrod's mouth, 
in allusion to the Confusion of Tongues; see the Inferno, xxxi. 67 81. 

62. Cf. Gen. xi. 9, "Therefore is the name of it called Babel," 
where the margin has, "That is, Confusion." Cf. also Josephus, 
Antiquities, I. iv. 3, "The place wherein they built the tower is now 
called Babylon^ because of the confusion of that language which they 
readily understood before ; for the Hebrews mean by the word Babel, 
Confusion." It appears, however, that "the native etymology (of 
Babylon] is Bab-il, ' the gate of the god ,' or perhaps more simply 
' the gate of God ' " (Smith's Bible Diet.}. 

73 74 "This being not asserted in Scripture, but only supposed 
by some writers, is better put into the mouth of Adam, than of the 
Angel" (Newton). 

Compare the reasons for the building of the Tower that Josephus 
gives : " He (Nimrod) said he would be avenged on God, if he should 
have a mind to drown the world again ; for that he would build a tower 
too high for the waters to be able to reach ! and that he would avenge 
himself on God for destroying their forefathers," Antiquities, I. iv. 2. 

76 78. The knowledge of physics which the lines reveal is not 
very appropriate in the mouth of Adam (Keightley). 

77. pine-, a transitive verb; cf. xi. 486, and Richard II. v. i. 77. 

78. breath... bread. For Milton's use of these verbal quibbles and 
jingling sounds, see i. 642, xi. 62527, notes. 

81. affecting to subdue, aiming at subduing; commonly used, like 
Lat. affectare, with a direct accusative of the thing aimed at. Cf. in. 
206, "affecting Godhead." 

83 90. For the association of freedom with reason cf. in. 108 10 
and ix. 351, 352. 

84. right reason ; cf. VI. 42, note. 

85. twinned, i.e. closely united, as if they were twins; reason is the 
very counterpart of liberty. Shakespeare several times uses the verb 
twin in much the same way to express close connection, as in Carlo- 
lanus, IV. 4. 15, or close resemblance, as in Cymbeline, I. 6. 35, "the 
twinned stones upon the beach" (i.e. exactly alike). Editors compare 
Timon of Athens, IV. 3. 3 5. 

4 I2 



644 PARADISE LOST. BOOK XII. 

95, 96. The form in which the thought is conveyed seems a re- 
miniscence of Matthew xviii. 7, "it must needs be that offences come." 
In IV. 393 M. calls necessity " the tyrant's plea." 

97. decline ; used of deterioration. Cf. Hamlet ', I. 5. 50. 

100, 101. See the note on XI. 798, 799. 

101 104. irreverent son, i.e. Ham, the father of Canaan. Cf. Gen. 
ix. 21 25, especially verse 25, "And he [Noah] said, Cursed be 
Canaan; a servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren." 

in. one peculiar nation. Cf. passages like Dent, xiv. 2, Ps. cxxxv. 4. 
M. discusses this point in The Christian Doctrine, I. 1 7. 

113. The allusion is to Abraham, faithful; see 152. 

114. on this side, i.e. eastward of; cf. Joshua xxiv. 2, 3. The 
word 'ibrt, whence Hebrew, which was first used of Abraham (Gen. 
xiv. 13), signifies 'living across,' i.e. across, or east of, the Euphrates. 
It was the term applied by the Canaanites to the Jewish immigrants 
into Canaan. 

115. bred tip. M. infers this from Joshua xxiv. 2, where we are 
told that "Terah, the father of Abraham... served other gods." Cf. 
The Christian Doctrine, I. 17, "He called Abraham from his father's 
house. ..who was even an idolater at the time" (P. W. iv. 321). 

117. i.e. during the life-time of Noah. According to the chrono- 
logy given in Gen. ix. and xi., Noah lived many years after the birth of 
Terah ; and we have just seen, from Josh. xxiv. 2, that Terah wor- 
shipped false gods. 

1 1 8. Cf. S. A. 1 140, " My trust is in the Living God " ; the phrase 
is frequent in the Bible; cf. Heb. iii. 12, i Tim. iv. 10. 

1 20, 121. Genesis xii. ; Acts vii. In visions (see XI. 377) the highest 
type of revelation was thought to be made; we often find the word 
contrasted with dream. Cf. Cornus, 453 58; so in Cowley's Essays 
(p. 21, Pitt Press ed.), " I fell at last into this vision ; or if you please 
to call it but a dream, I shall not take it ill, because the father of 
poets tells us, even dreams, too, are from God" (where the Homeric 
reference is the same as in 61 1). See Numbers xii. 6. 

127. 128. " By faith Abraham went out, not knowing whither 

he went," Heb. xi. 8. 

128. I see him, but thou canst not. A variation on the method of 
narration adopted in book xi. (423). The wording is like Oberon's 
" That very time I saw, but thou [Puck] couldst not," A Midsummer- 
Nights Dream, n. i. 155. 

129. Haran was the place where Abraham received the command 
from God to journey to Canaan (Gen. xii. i 4). But M. is thinking 
of Acts vii. 2 4, where it is said that "The God of glory appeared 



NOTES. 645 

unto our father Abraham" before he came "out of the land of the 
Chaldeans." 

130. Ur the capital of southern Chaldea, and a great com- 
mercial mart ; it then lay close to the mouth of the Euphrates, as at 
that time the waters of the Persian Gulf extended much further inland 
than now. But from the reference to Haran we may conjecture that M. 
supposed Ur to be in Upper Mesopotamia, i.e. at least 400 miles north 
of its real site. In this he followed a view formerly held by many 
scholars, and suggested by Acts vii. 2 4, the Scriptural passage, as we 
have said, on which, mainly, this couplet is based. An old theory iden- 
tified Ur with Orfah=the Greek Edessa, in northern Mesopotamia. 

130, 131. M. speaks as though Abraham's journey were con- 
tinuous, and his stay at Haran a mere episode, whereas the Scripture 
implies that he dwelt there some time (Gen. xi. 31, Acts vii. 4). 

passing... the ford', this must refer to the crossing of the Euphrates ; 
but Haran, or Charran (the Carra of the famous Parthian victory), was 
on the western bank of the Euphrates. We must remember that in the 
i ;th century scholars had to depend on very imperfect maps, travellers' 
narratives and such-like doubtful evidence. 

132. servitude, servants : abstract for concrete. 

135 51. In these lines M. first traces the journey of Abraham to 
the Promised Land (cf. Gen. xii. 5, 6) ; then sketches in outline the 
geographical position and extent of the Land, glancing at the number of 
Scriptural texts which suit his purpose ; and finally shows what was the 
scope of the promise made to Abraham. 

139 41. The four boundaries are : (i) the town (or district) of 
Hamath, in Upper Syria, lying in the valley of the Orontes ; afterwards 
called Epiphaneia by Antiochus Epiphanes, and now again known as 
Hamah ; expressly mentioned as the northern limit of Canaan in Numb. 
xxxiv. 7, 8. (2) The Desert of Zin, forming part of the southern frontier 
of the Holy Land (Numb, xxxiv. 3). (3) Mt Hermon, ' the lofty peak ' ; 
the most conspicuous mountain in Palestine, and the great landmark 
of the Israelites. In Scripture Hermon is associated with, not the 
eastern but, the northern boundary; cf. Ps. Ixxxix. 12, "The north 
and the south thou hast created them : Tabor and Hermon shall rejoice 
in thy name." Perhaps this was why M. afterwards added that the 
Jordan was the "true limit eastward." (4) The "western sea," i.e. 
the Mediterranean ; cf. Numb, xxxiv. 6, " And as for the western 
border, ye shall even have the great sea for a border : this shall be your 
west border." 

143, 144. Mt Carmel is one of the most striking geographical 
features of Palestine, being the only headland which breaks the coast-line. 



646 PARADISE LOST. BOOK XII. 

double-founted probably an allusion to the old belief that the 
Jordan, in its upper course, was formed by the union of two streams 
thought to give the river its name; these were the Dan and iz Jor, 
and their supposed place of confluence lay near Caesarea Philippi. In 
reality, Jordan is from a Heb. root 'to flow down, descend,' and the 
sources of the river must be looked for in the water-shed of Libanus on 
the one hand, and of Mt Hermon on the other. Sylvester, however, 
had mentioned its "double source," and, as Todd pointed out, the 
traveller George Sandys speaks of it as " seeming to arise from Jor 
and Dan, two not far distant fountaines" 

Probably Sandys was Milton's main authority for the topography of 
Palestine. His Travels^ first published in 1615, were very popular, often 
reprinted, and often quoted. They contain a vivid and detailed account 
of the Holy Land. Milton mentions Sandys in Of Reformation in 
England^ P. W. II. 380, and borrowed from him (almost certainly) the 
account of the rites of Moloch in the Nativity Ode, 204 10, and 
P. L. I. 392 96 ; and there is reason for thinking that in Samson 
Agonistes the description of the amphitheatre in which the catastrophe 
of the play occurs was inspired by a passage of the same writer. It is 
quite likely therefore that Sandys was responsible for doublc-founi to here. 

145, 146. true limit. The Jordan is mentioned as the eastern 
boundary of Canaan in Numb, xxxiv. 12. Nine tribes and a half of 
the Israelites dwelt west of it, only two tribes and a half (Manasseh) on 
the eastern bank. The river is constantly spoken of as a boundary ; 
cf. such phrases as ' over Jordan,' ' beyond Jordan.' 

his sons', the allusion is to i Chronicles v. 23. Senir is the 
Amorite name for Mt Hermon ; cf. Deut. iii. 9. But in the verse of 
Chronicles just referred to, Senir and Hermon are distinguished, so that 
Senir may also have been applied to some range of hills running off 
from the great mountain in an eastern direction ; and this, apparently, 
was Milton's idea; cf "long ridge," which would be a very inappro- 
priate description of Hermon. We know that Manasseh spread eastward 
far beyond their original territory even over the deserts between 
Palestine and the Euphrates. 

151 63. Cf. Gen. xvii. 5; also Gal. iii. 9, "So then they which 
be of faith are blessed with faithful Abraham." The historical allusion 
in the lines is, of course, to Jacob's going down to Egypt at the bidding 
of Joseph Gen. xlv., xlvi. 

158. Cf. Vergil's septemgemini trepida ostia Nili (En. vi. 801). 
The allusion to its seven mouths is frequent. 

167. of guests he makes them slaves ; on this classical idiom see the 
notes on iv. 153, vin. 433. 



NOTES. 647 

172, "And they spoiled the Egyptians," Exod. xii. 36. 
173 190. Exodus vii. xii. 

173. denies y refuses ; cf. King Lear, n. 4. 89, "Deny to speak with 
me?" 

180. emboss, cover with swellings ; cf. As You Like It, n. 7. 67, 
"embossed sores," and King Lear, n. 4. 227, "A plague-sore, an 
embossed carbuncle." Cf. Fr. bosse, ' a lump.' 

182. rend. Cf. Hamlet, n. 2. 508, 509, 
" the dreadful thunder 
Doth rend the region " (i.e. air). 

18588. An echo of I. 33843. Cf. also Sylvester, Du Bartas 
(Grosart's ed., I. 189): 

"Then the Thrice-Sacred with a sable Cloud 
Of horned Locusts doth the Sun becloud." 

1 88. palpable ; see the note on II. 406. 

191. the river-dragon, i.e. Pharaoh. The First Ed. has this instead 
of the. Compare Ezekiel xxix. 3, " Behold, I am against thee, Pharaoh 
king of Egypt, the great dragon that lieth in the midst of his rivers." 
Dragon { draco in the Vulgate, and dpaiuav in the Septuagint) is the 
translation in several places of the Heb. word tannin, applied to any 
monster; cf. Job vii. 12 ("whale") and Ps. xci. 13, where the R.V. 
substitutes "serpent" for "dragon." 

197. Cf. vn. 293, and Milton's paraphrase on Ps. cxiv., "Why 
turned Jordan toward his crystal fountains ? " ; also that on Ps. cxxxvi., 
" The floods stood still, like walls of glass." 

200. Saint. M. is very fqnd of this word, perhaps because Saints 
was the name by which many of the Republican Independents called 
themselves, in allusion to the sense 'holy man* in the Epistles of 
St Paul. 

201 14. Exod. xiii. 21, 22, xiv. 

207. defends, forbids; cf. XI. 86. "This is the common sense of 
defend m our ancient laws and statutes" (Todd). 

210. craze, break, smash ; only here and in S. A. 571. 

211. A reminiscence of I. 338. 

214 19. Exod. xiii. 17, 18. The march of the Israelites was 
first, from Rameses to Succoth ; thence to Etham ; and then southwards, 
through the wilderness east of the Red Sea. Their readiest way from 
Succoth would have been by the north-east route, along the coast 
of the Mediterranean ; but this would have brought them into the 
country of the warlike Philistines. In 215 from the shore refers, 
obviously, to the Red Sea. In 216 the wild Desert seems to be a 
general term comprehending all the desert parts through which they 



648 PARADISE LOST. BOOK XII. 

advanced to Canaan, such as the wilderness of Shur and Sin and 
Sinai. 

720. See xi. 798, 799 (note), and cf. the passage quoted there from 
S. A. 268 71. We have the opposite sentiment in II. 255 57. 

220 22. more sweet, i.e. than liberty ; the sense, I think, is 
* noble men and ignoble alike if untrained in arms prefer life to 
freedom, except in cases where mere rashness transports them from 
their usual characters.' 

224 26. Alluding to the "seventy of the elders of Israel," 
whom Moses was directed to associate with himself in the govern- 
ment of the Israelites (Exod. xxiv., Numb. xi. 16 24), in which 
Council some scholars have seen the beginnings of the Jewish 
Sanhedrim. There may also be a glance at Exod. xviii., where, on the 
advice of Jethro, Moses delegates his judicial authority in minor cases 
to the tribal heads, who "judged the people at all seasons." 

227 38. Exod. xix., xx. See xi. 73 76, note, and cf. Milton's 
Doctrine and Discipline of Divorce, 3 : " Did God for this come down 
and cover the mount of Sinai with his glory, uttering in thunder those 
his sacred ordinances out of the bottomless treasures of his wisdom and 
infinite goodness?" P. W. HI. 220. 

grey, i.e. with smoke and clouds (Exod. xix. 16, 18), says Newton; but 
perhaps it is only an ' epithet of adornment,' like 'hoary' (i.e. with age). 

228. he descending. Needlessly changed to him by Bentley. M., 
however, varies the idiom ; see vn. 142 (note). 

229. trumpet's ; in the First Ed. trumpets  the passage in Exodus 
shows that the singular is required (Bradshaw). See I. 59, note. 

233- i.e- of the Seed destined to bruise. For the inversion of order 
see I. 206, note. 

238. what they besought. So the Second Ed. ; the First reads 
"he grants them their desire." 

23941. Cf. 310, 311, note. 

241, 242. " For Moses truly said unto the fathers, A prophet shall 
the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me," 
Acts iii. 22, where the reference is to Deut. xviii. 15 19. 

249. prescript, command; cf. "the prescript of this roll," Antony 
and Cleopatra, in. 8. 5. So in S. A. 308. 

250. cedar. Some suppose that M. was thinking of the Temple 
and had forgotten that shittim-wood was employed in the construction 
of the Tabernacle. But may not M. have thought that the wood called 
shittim was some kind of cedar (though scholars now identify it with 
the acacia) ? 

3 53> 254- Referring to the two images of Cherubim, overlaid with 



NOTES. 649 

gold, which were placed, with expanded wings, over the mercy-seat 
(cf. XI. 2) that covered the ark (i Kings vi.). The figures symbolised 
the guardian powers that drove off evil spirits. 

254 56. " That the seven lamps signified the seven planets, and 
that therefore the lamps stood slope-wise, as it were to express the 
obliquity of the zodiac, is the gloss [i.e. interpretation] of Josephus, from 
whom probably Milton borrowed it " (Newton). See xi. 247. 

256 58. Exod. xl. 3438 ; cf. 333. This is the allusion in S. A. 
1674, " ^ n Silo, his bright sanctuary," and the Animadversions > 4, " the 
redoubled brightness of thy descending cloud, that now covers thy 
tabernacle," P. W. III. 71. 

258 60. Exod. xxiii. 23. 

263 67. Joshua x. 12, 13. This is one of the subjects mentioned 
in the Cambridge MSS., in the list of schemes of Milton's great poem, 
thus: "Josuah in Gibeon. Josu. 10." 

267. Israel  the title ('prince or soldier of God ') was first applied 
to Jacob, Gen. xxxii. 28. 

270. "These interpositions of Adam have a very good effect; for 
otherwise the continued narrative of the Angel would appear too long 
and tedious" (Newton). See vi. 114, note. 

274. Alluding to the Serpent's false promise, " your eyes shall be 
opened," Gen. iii. 5. 

283. argue so many sins, prove so many sins to exist. The senti- 
ment of the whole line is that expressed by Tacitus corruptissima 
reipublica pluHmte leges (Peck). Cf. Milton's Second Defence of the 
People of England: " since there are often in a republic men who have 
the same itch for making a multiplicity of laws, as some poetasters have 
for making many verses, and since laws are usually worse in proportion 
as they are more numerous..." (P. W. i. 293). 

287 306. This is one of those theological passages into which 
Milton distils the doctrines of a number of texts (as interpreted by 
himself) ; such as Rom. iii. 20, iv. 22 25, v. i, 17, 21, vii. 7, 8, viii. 15, 
x. 5 ; Heb. vii. 19, ix. 13, 14, x. i, 4, 5 ; and Galatians iii., iv. 

pravity, tendency to evil, moral perversity. M. does not use the 
word elsewhere. Johnson has it in his Life of Milton: "Ariosto's 
pravity is generally known." 

287. evince, demonstrate. Cf. Burton, Anatomy, " Arion made 
fishes follow him, which, as common experience evinceth, are much 
affected with music." Milton has the word once elsewhere ; cf. P. R. 
IV - 235, " Error by his own arms is best evinced." For the noun in the 
same sense, cf. the first lines of Sir Thomas Browne's Vulgar Errors^ 
speaking of "the common infirmity of human nature; of whose de- 



650 PARADISE LOST. BOOK XII. 

ceptible condition... there should not need any other eviction than the 
frequent errors we shall ourselves commit, even in the express declare- 
ment thereof." 

297 99. The sense is ' the law cannot appease the conscience, 
nor can man perform "the moral part" of the law.' 

307309. Deuteronomy xxxiv. The passage is well illustrated by 
The Christian Doctrine, I. 26: "The imperfection of the law was 
manifested in the person of Moses himself; for Moses, who was a type 
of the law, could not bring the children of Israel into the land of 
Canaan, that is, into eternal rest ; but an entrance was given to them 
under Joshua, or Jesus." 

310, 311. Joshua, ' the Saviour,' is the same word as Jesus', in the 
Septuagint Joshua is called 'lT7<roDs. Other forms ztzjehoshua, Hoshea 
and Oshea ; and Hosanna (a cry for help) is from the same stem meaning 
' to save.' Joshua is treated as a type of Christ (cf. Hebrews iv. 8), the 
points of resemblance being many ; and perhaps that which M. specially 
refers to in the words " His name and ojfice bearing " is, that as 
Joshua led the Jews through the wilderness and brought them to the 
Land of Promise, so Christ brings men, after their journey through the 
world, into the presence of God, as being their Mediator (xi. 32 44) 
and Advocate. (Smith's Bible Dictionary.) 

quell, crush utterly ; a stronger word then. 

322. shall receive, i.e. by the mouth of the prophet, Nathan 
2 Sam. vii. 16. 

3 2 4 3 2 5 i- e> <a H tne prophets (cf. 243) shall sing, or foretell, the 
same, viz. that there shall rise etc. ' ; Prophecy being the abstract for 
concrete. M. is thinking of passages like Isaiah xi. 10, Psalm Ixxxix. 

3<5, 37- 

332. his next son, i.e. Solomon, who built the Temple ; i Kings vi., 
vii., 2 Chron. iii., iv. 

337> 33 8 - heaped to the popular sum, i.e. the faults of the kings 
added to the sum total of their people's sins. 

342. saw'st ; not literally; the angel had only related the event. 

34447. The seventy years of Captivity, foretold by Jeremiah 
(xxv. 12), dated from B.C. 606 to B.C. 536. 

348 50. The "kings " are Cyrus, who first proclaimed the decree 
for the rebuilding of the Temple, and his successors Artaxerxes and 
Darius. The time occupied in the work was from B.C. 536 to B.C. 515. 
This period of Jewish history is dealt with in the book of Ezra. 

353 56. An allusion to the struggle for the high-priesthood, in the 
2nd cent. B.C., between Jason and Menelaus (i.e. Joshua and Onins each 
had adopted a Greek name at a time when Greek influence was affecting 



NOTES. 651 

the Jews very strongly). Jason obtained the office from the Syrian king 
Antiochus Epiphanes, circa 175 B.C.; afterwards it was transferred to 
Menelaus, 172 B.C. The conflicts that arose between the rival high- 
priests gave Antiochus an excuse for assaulting Jerusalem and plundering 
the Temple, 170 B.C. Two years later, 168 B.C., his troops again 
occupied the city ; the Temple was desecrated ; " an idol altar " was 
set up, and the Jews were forbidden the observance of their own 
religion. These events are related in i , 2 Maccabees, and by Josephus. 

Indirectly, lines 353 55 are an attack, like 507 37, on the 
clergy. 

35^, 357- ifayviQit Asmonean family, in whose line the office of 
high-priest descended, B.C. 153 B.C. 35. The first of the race to 
assume the title of king was Aristobulus I., B.C. 107. Their sovereignty 
ended with the capture of Jerusalem by Pompey, 63 B.C. 

David's sons. The last ruler of Israel who could claim direct descent 
from David was Zerubbabel, under whose leadership the Jews returned 
from the Babylonish Captivity in 536 B.C. The names of his descend- 
ants we are told in the genealogies of Christ (given from somewhat 
different points of view) by Matthew and Luke. That of Matthew 
" exhibits the successive heirs of the kingdom (of David) ending with 
Christ," i.e. it shows us to whom Milton refers when he speaks of 
"David's sons," the rightful heirs, though not "regarded." 

358. a stranger, i.e. Antipater an Idumean (the Greek form of 
Edomite), who was made governor of Jerusalem by Pompey in 61 B.C., 
and afterwards procurator of Judaea by Julius Caesar, 47 B.C. His 
second son was Herod the Great, who was appointed king of Judaea by 
the Roman Senate in 38 B.C. During his reign Christ was born. 

360. barred; he purposely uses a legal term. 

36067. This passage should be compared with the Nativity Ode, 
and the similar account of Christ's birth in P. R. i. 242 54. The 
verbal resemblances are numerous. Matthew ii. ; Luke ii. 

364. solemn; "sent in solemnity.... This single word solemn 
expresses the importance of the message" (Richardson). 

366, 367. thither, i.e. to Bethlehem ; and M. speaks as though the 
song of the angels was heard there not merely " in the field." 

squadroned, in troops; cf. the Nativity Ode, 21. 

36971. The literary form of the passage is primarily from Vergil, 
ALneid i. 287, Impcrium oceano,famam qui terminct astris. The theo- 
logical idea is that of the "glorious reign of Christ on earth with his 
Saints, so often promised in Scripture, even until all his enemies shall 
be subdued" (The Christian Doctrine, I. 33). In this theological work 
Milton states his belief at length, quoting the passages of Scripture on 



652 PARADISE LOST. BOOK XII. 

which it rests, such as Tsai. ix. 7, Dan. vii. 13, 14, 22, Luke i. 32, 33, 
Mat. xix. 28, Rev. ii. 25 27. 

The editor of The Christian Doctrine in Bohn's edition of Milton's 
prose-works says : 

"The Millenarians or Fifth Monarchy men of the i7th century 
were sufficiently numerous to occupy a place in the history of Milton's 
times. It appears from this treatise that he himself was far from 
holding the extravagant and fanatical opinions which characterised the 
greater part of this sect." He held, in common with certain of the 
Fathers and later theologians, the belief expressed in the sentence 
quoted above. It is glanced at in vii. 157 61, and inspires, as the 
editor of the Doctrine points out, one of the finest passages of his 
prose, viz. the close of the treatise Of Reformation in England. 

373. Cf. the picture of Dalila in S. A. 728, "Like a fair flower 
surcharged with dew, she weeps." 

379, 380. Luke i. 28. 

383. capital, deadly, fatal; cf. "my capital secret," S. A. 394. 
Some editors think that in each passage there is a quibble on this and the 
other sense 'pertaining to the head,' Lat. caput. The word is always 
a dissyllable, capital, in M. 

38688. Cf. P. R. i. 17375, where the song is raised in Heaven : 
"Victory and triumph to the Son of God, 
Now entering his great duel, not of arms, 
But to vanquish by wisdom hellish wiles ! " 

392. i.e. whose fall did not disable him from giving thee, etc.' 

393. recure, heal; not elsewhere in M., but common in Eliza- 
bethan E. Cf. Venus and Adonis, 465, "A smile recures the wounding 
of a frown." So unrecuring ' incurable, ' Titus Andronicus, in. i. 90. 

401. appaid, satisfied, paid; often in Spenser; cf. The Faerie 
Qucene, 11. 12. 28, "For she is inly nothing ill apayd." Shakespeare 
has it once Lucrece, 914. 

403, 404. "Love is the fulfilling of the law," Rom. xiii. 10; and 
verse 8. 

406. "It is written, Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree," 
Gal. iii. 13, the reference being to Deut. xxi. 23 ; that passage, however, 
seems to imply crucifixion after death, i.e. as a mark of disgrace. It 
was not only among the Jews that crucifixion was held in the utmost 
horror; many passages show that the Romans regarded it as the greatest 
of degradations a servile supplicium from which citizens and even 
freedmen were exempt. See Juvenal vi. 219. 

410. to save probably dependent on believe-, 'who shall believe his 
merits not their own works, though done in conformity with the law 



NOTES. 653 

to save them. ' The passage is commonly explained so, but it is obviously 
very awkward, as the verb believe has already taken two different 
constructions. 

415 17. " The enemies of Adam were the law that was against 
him, and the sins of all mankind as springing originally from him, and 
therefore in some sense chargeable upon him. The author, in this 
passage, alludes to Col. ii. 14" (Newton). 

420, 421. Romans vi. 9. 

424. thy ransom ; so the First and Second Eds. ; " Adam is here 
spoken of, not as a single person, ...[but] as one who was representative 
of the whole human race " (Pearce). Cf. again 428. Many later texts 
change thy to the. 

427. faith... works. Cf. XI. 64. 

434. a death like sleep ; the "temporal death" of the redeemed is 
not an everlasting state, but a " sleep " from which there shall be an 
awakening ( i Cor. xv. 5 1). Milton discusses the question in The Christian 
Doctrine p , I. 13, from which it is clear that by "temporal death" he 
signified the death of the body. 

The reading death-like sleep is a mere tampering with the 
text. 

435. wafting, passage ; cf. u. 1042. 

442. in the profiuent stream. "It was the poet's opinion that 
baptism should take place in running water " (Keightley). The passage 
in which M. expressed this view occurs in his treatise on The Christian 
Doctrine, i. 28. in which he speaks of baptism as a sacrament " wherein 
the bodies of believers who engage themselves to pureness of life, are 
immersed in running water in profluentem aqtiam, to signify their re- 
generation by the Holy Spirit, and their union with Christ." 

446 65. Cf. Gal. iii. 7, 16; Rom. iv. 16; Colos. ii. 15; Ephes. 
iv. 8 10, i. 20, 21 ; Luke xxi. 27, xxiv. 26; John v. 28, 29; Rev. xi. 
18, xx. 2. 

452. && triumphing, as in I. 123 ; so sometimes in Shakespeare. 

454. Prince of air. This title of Satan is illustrated by P. R. I. 
39 47, where he summons an assembly of his followers "in mid air," 
and addresses them thus : 

"O ancient Powers of Air, and this wide World; 
(For much more willingly I mention Air, 
This our old conquest, than remember Hell, 
Our hated habitation) well ye know," etc. 

See Appendix, p. 676. 

45863. Cf. III. 323 et seq. 

460. "To judge the quick and the dead," Apostle? Creed. 



654 PARADISE LOST. BOOK XII. 

467. period, end, conclusion. "The period of thy tyranny ap- 
proacheth," I Henry VL iv. 2. 17. 

477 93- Many texts are alluded to : e.g. Rom. v. 20 ; 2 Cor. iv. 15 ; 
Luke xxiv. 49,' Gal. v. 6 ("faith which worketh by love") ; John xiv. 
18, 23, xv. 26, xvi. 3; Ephes. vi. n ("put on the whole armour of 
God"), 13 and 16 (" to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked ") ; and 
Ps. Ivi. n. 

495. Cf. S. A. 663, 664. 

49750 2 - Acts 

505. Cf. S. A. 597, " My race of glory run, and race of shame." 
It is St Paul's favourite metaphor of athletes competing on the 
stadium (fleb. xii. i ; i Cor. ix. 24). 

507 u. For I know this, that after my departing shall grievous 
wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock," Acts xx. 29. There 
is the same allusion in iv. 193 (see note) ; and in the Sonnet on Cromwell 
he speaks of the "hireling wolves, whose Gospel is their maw." 

This passage (507 37), though it nominally traces (from Milton's 
point of view) the history of the Church from Apostolic times, is perhaps 
primarily directed against the Church of England ; similar charges are 
scattered passim through Milton's prose-works. A close parallel is 
the long piece (113 31) of invective, thinly disguised under pastoral 
allegory, in Lycidas. Time had intensified Milton's opinions. 

We have seen in many places Milton's anti-ecclesiastical bias; 
a fresh and characteristic illustration has been noted recently by 
Professor Firth. He shows that in his History of Britain Milton 
deliberately "avoided the ecclesiastical side of British and Saxon 
history," and refused to supplement the meagre political records at his 
disposal by "drawing upon the fund of information which his authorities 
supplied about the religious life of the times. The development of a 
scientific interest in the monuments and institutions of the past was one 
of the characteristics of I7th century England, but so far as it showed 
itself in researches into ecclesiastical antiquities Milton took no interest 
in the movement." 

511. M. often taunts the clergy with avarice and desire of prefer- 
ment. Cf. An Apology for Smectymnuus, " they, for lucre, use to creep 
into the Church undiscernibly," P. W. ill. 164. 

511 14. In his prose- works M. frequently depreciates the 
writings of the Fathers : the "traditions" of the Church as to doctrine 
and forms, are in his eyes " a broken reed " (Areopagttica). 

superstitions ; see III. 451 54, note. 

516, 517. to join secular power. "On this subject he had been 
particularly copious in his tract Of Reformation in England" (Todd). 



NOTES. 655 

Compare Dante's condemnation of the usurpation of temporal power 
by the Papacy; see the Purgatorio, xvi. 

519, 520. In The Likeliest Means to Remove Hirelings oztt of the 
Church M. says, "the Scriptures (are) translated into every vulgar 
tongue, as being held, in main matters of belief and salvation, plain and 
easy to the poorest : and such no less than their teachers have the Spirit 
to guide them in all truth" (P. W. ill. 24). 

522 24. laws which; laws which are neither laid down in the 
Scripture, nor dictated by the natural instincts of good men towards 
piety. In The Doctrine and Discipline of Divorce (preface) Milton 
speaks ot "a law not only written by Moses, but charactered in us by 
nature," P. W. in. 182. See Jeremiah xxxi. 33. 

525, 526. "Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty," 
2 Coi iii. 17. Cf. The Christian Doctrine, I. 27, "liberty must be 
considered as belonging in an especial -manner to the Gospel, and as 
consorting therewith" (P. W. iv. 398). 

527. "The temple of God is holy, which temple ye are," i Cor. 
iii. 17. Cf. the fine allusion in Macbeth, II. 3. 73. So in Comus, 
460, 461. 

53 2 > 533- John iv. 23. 

534, 535. Showing Milton's dislike of ceremonies in worship, 

539. Romans viii. 22. 

539 41. There is an underlying political reference: M. never 
hesitates to foreshadow the ultimate overthrow of the Royalists against 
whom he and his party had struggled. We have a similar, but clearer, 
attack on his enemies in P. R. n. 42 48. See also xi. 808 18, note. 

540. Newton noted that in Acts iii. 19, " when the times of re- 
freshing shall come," the Gk. word avd{vl;is, translated by " refreshing," 
is rendered by respiratio in one of the Latin Versions of the Bible 
(though the Vulgate has refrigerium), and has the sense respiratio in the 
Septuagint in Exodus viii. 15. 

545 4 y. Matt. xxiv. 30; 2 Thess. i. 7, 8. See the Nativity Ode, 
163, 164, and the end of the treatise Of Reformation in England, in 
which M. looks forward to " that day, when thou, the eternal and 
shortly-expected King, shalt open the clouds to judge the several king- 
doms of the world," P. W. II. 419; also The Christian Doctrine, I. 33. 

547 5 1 - Cf. in. 33335, xi. 900, 901. "This notion of the 
Heavens and Earth being renewed after the conflagration, and made 
the habitation of Angels and just men made perfect, was very pleasing 
to Milton " (Newton). 

554> 555- The time measured by the Archangel is that during which 
this world lasts. 



656 PARADISE LOST. BOOK XII. 

56568. Ps. cxlv. 9; Rom. xii. 21, " Be not overcome of evil, but 
overcome evil with good"; and i Cor. i. 27. " There is the sense of 
Scripture, if not the very words " (Newton). 

569, 570. Cf. IX. 31, 32 and S. A. 654. 

571. Mors janua vita. 

58184. Alluding to i Pet. i. 5 7, i Cor. xiii. 

582. answerable, corresponding with; cf. ix. 20, S. A. 615, and 
the Areopagitica, "a virtue answerable to your highest actions." 

583 85. love... charity. Cf. the Tetrachordon, "Christ having... 
interpreted the fulfilling of all through charity, hath in that respect set 
us over law, in the free custody of his love," P. W. in. 323. 

587, The thought is anticipated in iv. 75, where Satan says 
of himself, "Which way I fly is hell: myself am hell." Cf. too iv. 
so 23. It is one of those world-thoughts which occur independently 
to many minds. This for instance is a close parallel from Fitzgerald's 
Omar Khayydm : 

"I sent my soul through the Invisible, 
Some letter of that After-life to spell : 
And by-and-by my soul returned to me, 
And answered, ' I myself am Heav'n and Hell.' " 
Cf. also the famous lines, I. 254, 255. 

588, 589. this top of speculation, this hill whence we have looked 
as from a watch-tower (Lat. specula}. Cf. the description of it in xi. 
377 80, and P. R. iv. 236, " Look once more, ere we leave this 
specular mount." Shakespeare uses speculation = * the act of watching,' 
Henry V. IV. 2. 31. 

59*. 593- See xi. 11022. 

602. "And all the days that Adam lived were nine hundred and 
thirty years : and he died," Gen. v. 5. 

608. Contrast the Argument of the book where Adam " wakens 
Eve." 

6n. Cf. Iliad I. 63, KO.I ydp r ovap tic Ai6s &m ; " the application 
is very elegant in this place, as Adam's was a vision, and Eve's a dream ; 
and God was in the one, as well as in the other " (Newton). See the 
passage from Cowley cited ante (120, 121, note). 

615. Newton pointed out the allusion to Vergil, Eel. m. 52, in me 
mora non erit ulla. Eve has laid to heart the words of Michael, 
xi. 29092. 

627. station, post of watching; Lat statio, a military term^'a 
picket, guard.' 

629, 630. M. used the simile in IX. 179, 180, comparing Satan's 
stealthy course through the garden to "a black mist low-creeping." 



NOTES. 657 

marish, marsh ; an old word, said to be used often in the translations 
of Ariosto and Tasso, and by Spenser and Drayton. 

632. advanced, raised aloft, like a flag ; cf. v. 588. Shakespeare 
often applies it to a sword, perhaps by metaphor ; cf. Coriolanus, I. 6. 
61, "Filling the air with swords advanced and darts." 

633. The allusion (Genesis iii. 24) occurs in The Doctrine and 
Discipline of Divorce, 13, where he is arguing against those who con- 
demn divorce because it did not belong to the earliest times of Jewish 
history: "But still they fly back to the primitive institution, and would 
have us re-enter paradise against the sword that guards it " (P. W. 
ill. 243). Cf. too Marvell's lines (with their happy reminiscences of 
Richard II. II. i. 40 et seq.} in his beautiful country-poem, Upon 
Appleton House, written not long after the Civil War: 

"Oh thou, that dear and happy isle, 
The garden of the world erewhile, 
Thou Paradise of the four seas, 
Which Heaven planted us to please, 
But, to exclude the world, did guard 
With watery, if not flaming sword 
What luckless apple did we taste, 
To make us mortal, and thee waste?" 

634. fierce as a comet. Dunster observed that the simile maybe an 
echo of Sylvester's Du Bartas, which speaks of the entrance to Eden as 
guarded by 

" A waving sword, whose body shined bright, 

Like flaming comet in the midst of night." 

In II. 70811 M. compares the figure of Satan, at his meeting with 
Death, to a comet, 'which ; referring to the sword. 

635. vapour, heat; cf. Horace's sidernm vapor, Epodes in. 15. 
Libya is typical of a hot clime ; for the position of air between the two 
qualifying words, see XI. 162. adust, scorched, Lat. adustus. Bowie 
noted that Tasso (vn. 52) describes a comet shining per taria adusta. 
M. often mentions Tasso in his prose. 

636. parch ; M. uses it of the drying, withering effect of either 
cold (cf. n. 594, 595, Lycidas, 13) or heat as here. 

^37 638. A reminiscence of Gen. xix. 16, "And while he (Lot) 
lingered, the men laid hold upon his hand, and upon the hand of his 
wife... and they brought him forth." The destruction of the cities of the 
plain was one of the themes on which Milton thought of founding a 
poem. 

638 40. the eastern gate. See XI. 118 20, and cf. the account 
of the gate, iv. 54248. 

P. L. 42 



658 PARADISE LOST. BOOK XTT. 

640. subjected, lying below, Lat. subjectus ; so the adjective 
subject in Spenser; cf. The Faerie Queette, I. u. 19, and ill. 7. 4. 

643. Most editors explain brand to mean 'sword,' a sense it often 
bore in O. E., from the flashing of a sword -blade. Cf. Spenser, The Faerie 
Qucene, v. i. 8, "When so he list in wrath lift up his steely brand." 
The old use of brand =' sword' is revived in Tennyson ; cf. the Morte 
a" Arthur, where the word is used several times of King Arthur's sword 
Excalibur, e.g. "So flash'd and fell the brand Excalibur." Curiously, 
brand =' fire-brand' does not occur anywhere in Milton's poetry, except 
in the MS. of Comus, 384, where " the noontyde brand " is a synonym 
for " the mid-day sun," afterwards substituted. 

646. Editors compare Richard II. i. 3. 206, 207 (Mowbray's 
parting words) : 

"Farewell, my liege. Now no way can I stray; 
Save back to England, all the world's my way." 

648, 649. One of the subjects entered in the Cambridge MSS., under 
the heading "tragedies," is "Adam in Banishment." 

This couplet has been much discussed since Addison proposed to 
omit it on the inadequate grounds that the lines strike a note of sadness, 
whereas an epic is supposed to require a cheerful ending, and that they 
are less impressive than the preceding couplet. Peck proposed to trans- 
pose 646, 647 and 648, 649, making the poem conclude with "and 
Providence their guide." Bentley, by way of crown to his emendatory 
toils, composed a distich, "as close as may be to the author's words, 
and entirely agreeable to his scheme." But the lines stand in the First 
and Second Eds., and are therefore as authentic as any other part of the 
poem ; and, apart from their entirely Miltonic style, their calm beauty 
is appropriate to the feeling of mingled resignation and reluctance with 
which we may suppose that the exiles left their Paradise. Pearce justly 
notes that this feeling, indeed, corresponds precisely with the injunction 
(xi. 117) laid on Michael. Shakespearian tragedy usually ends on a 
quiet note. 



APPENDIX. 



THE COSMOLOGY OF PARADISE LOST. 

PARTS of Paradise Lost are not easily understood without some 
knowledge of Milton's conception of the Universe. I shall attempt 
therefore to set forth some of the main aspects of his cosmology : to 
explain, in fact, what he means by constantly recurrent terms such as 
' Empyrean,' Chaos,' * Spheres,' and the like. 

It is in book v. that he carries us back farthest in respect of time. 
The events described by Raphael (from line 563, onwards) precede not 
only the Creation of the World, but also the expulsion of the rebels 
from Heaven. And at this era, when the seeds of discord are being 
sown, we hear of two divisions of Space Heaven and Chaos : Heaven 
lying above Chaos. 

In book vi. the contest foreshadowed in book V. has begun. Now 
a third region is mentioned Hell (vi. 53 55) : a gloomy region carved 
out of the nethermost depths of Chaos. Its remoteness from Heaven 
may be inferred from I. 73, 74. Milton's working hypothesis, then 
his general conception of space and its partitionment prior to the 
Creation may be expressed roughly thus: above 1 , Heaven; beneath, 
Hell ; between, a great gulf, Chaos. 

Let us see what he has to say concerning each. 

Heaven, or the Empyrean 2 , is the abode of the Deity and His 
angelic subjects. It is a vast region, but not infinite. In x. 380 
Milton speaks of its "empyreal bounds"; in n. 1049 of its "battle- 
ments 3 "; in vi. 860 of its "crystal wall." These fence Heaven in 

1 i.e. from the point of view of this World, the position of which we shall see. 

2 The terms are synonymous. Empyrea.u=-j&., empyrceus, from Gk. ex.7rvpo?. 
The notion was that the Empyrean was formed of the element of fire (irup). Compare 
Batman vppon Bartlwlome (1582), a work which is a sort of encyclopaedia of the 
beliefs and ''science" (so to speak) current in the Elizabethan time : 

'* Ccelujn Enipereum is the first and highest heaven, the place of Angells, the 
Conn trey and habitation of blessed men. And hath that name Empireum from Pir, 
that is fire. ..not for burning, but for light and shining.. .and is the highest dwellyng- 
place of God" (p. 122). 

8 Cf. Lucretius' jtammantia moenia mundi(l. 74) and Gray's "flaming bounds of 
Space" (Progress of Poesy). 

42 2 



660 PARADISE LOST. 

from Chaos. When Satan voyages through space, in quest of the 
new-created World, he kens far off the crystal line of light that 
radiates from the empyreal bulwarks, marking where runs the severance 
betwixt Heaven and Chaos (n. 1034 37). In the wall of Heaven are 
the "everlasting gates" (vn. 565) opening on to Chaos (v. 253 56, 
vn. 205 209). The shape of Heaven Milton does not determine 
(ll. 1048); perhaps it is a square (x. 381). Its internal con- 
figuration and appearance he describes in language which reminds 
us of some lines (574 76) in book v. May not the Earth, says Raphael, 
"Be but the shadow of Heaven, and things therein 

Each to other like, more than on Earth is thought"? 
Milton expands this idea, and developing to the utmost the symbolical, 
objective presentment of the New Jerusalem in the Revelation, depicts 
a Heaven scarce distinguishable from an ideal Earth 1 . In fact, his 
Heaven and his Garden of Eden have much in common ; so that Satan 
exclaims, "O Earth, how like to Heaven!" (ix. 99). Thus the 
Heavenly landscape (if I may describe it in Miltonic language) has 
its vales, wood-covered heights and plains (vi. 70, 639 46) ; it is 
watered by living streams (v. 652) ; and fair with trees and flowers 2 
immortal amaranth and celestial roses (ill. 353 64), and vines 
(v. 635). Daylight and twilight and " dim Night " are known there 
(v. 627 29, 645, 685, vi. i 15). And soft winds fan the angels as 
they sleep (v. 654, 655). 

These angelic beings, divided according to tradition into nine 
Orders, each with particular duties, perform their ministries and 
solemn rites (vn. 149) in the courts of God (v. 650) and at the high 
temple of Heaven (vn. 148). Their worship is offered under forms 
which recall, now the ritual of the Temple-services of Israel, now the 
inspired visions of St John. They celebrate the Deity who dwells 
invisible, throned inaccessible (ill. 377) on the holy mount (vi. 5), 
howbeit omnipresent, as omnipotent, throughout Heaven and all 
space : round whose throne there rests a radiance of excessive bright- 
ness, at which even Seraphim, highest of Hierarchies, veil their eyes 
(ill. 37582). 

It has been objected that Milton's picture is too material. But he 
himself takes special pains to remind us that the external imagery 
under which he represents his concepts is symbolical, not literal 
adopted merely as a means of conveying some impression of that 
which is intrinsically indescribable. The truth, I believe, is that he 
has applied to Heaven the descriptions of ' Paradise f in the apocalyptic 

1 The Earth deteriorates after the fall of man (x. 651 et seq.). 

This is a descriptive detail most conspicuous in early Christian apocalyptic works. 



APPENDIX. 66l 

literature of tie first centuries of Christianity. The Revelation of 
Peter (dating perhaps from early in the second century A.D.) affords 
an illustration of these descriptions. St Peter is represented as 
asking our Lord where are the souls of the righteous dead "of 
what sort is the world wherein they are and possess glory? And 
the Lord showed him [me] a very great space outside this world shining 
excessively with light, and the air that was there illuminated with the 
rays of the sun, and the earth itself blooming with unfading flowers, and 
full of spices and fair-flowering plants, incorruptible and bearing a 
blessed fruit : and so strong was the perfume that it was borne even to 
us 1 from thence. And the dwellers in that place were clad in the 
raiment of angels of light, and their raiment was like their land : and 
angels encircled them 2 ." 

The second region, for which Chaos seems the simplest title, is 
also variously called "the wasteful Deep" (n. 961, vi. 862), " the utter 
Deep" (vi. 716), "the Abyss," "the vast (or "main") Abyss" (i. 21, 
III. 83, vii. 211, 234). Here rules the God of Chaos with his consort 
Night (n. 95963). According to the long description in book II. 
890 et seq. t this region is an illimitable ocean, composed of the embryon 
atoms (semina rerum) whereof all substances may be formed whereof 
Hell and the World are afterwards formed. It is a vast agglomeration 
of matter in its primal state, " neither sea, nor shore, nor air, nor fire 3 ." 
Here prevails eternal anarchy of storm and wind and wave and stunning 
sounds. In vn. 210, an, the Messiah and His host stand at the open 
gate of Heaven and look forth on to Chaos ; and what they behold is an 
Abyss " Outrageous as a sea,, dark, wasteful, wild." 

The creation of Hell, we may perhaps assume, just precedes the 
fall of the angels 4 . It has been prepared for their punishment when, 

1 i.e. St Peter and the other disciples who are with our Lord on the Mount of 
Olives. See The Gospel according to Peter, and the Revelation of Peter (Cambridge 
University Press ed., 1892), pp. 48, 49. 

2 Dr James (whose version I have just quoted) gives a similar passage from a 
rather later work, the History of Barlaam andjosaphat, wherein the Paradise of the 
just is revealed in a vision as "a plain of vast extent, flourishing with fair and very 
sweet-smelling flowers, where he saw plants of all manner of kinds, loaded with 
strange and wondrous fruits, most pleasant to the eye and desirable to touch. And 
the leaves of the trees made clear music to a soft breeze and sent forth a delicate 
fragrance, whereof none could tire. ..And through this wondrous and vast plain [he 
passed] to a city which gleamed with an unspeakable brightness and had its walls of 
translucent gold, and its battlements of stones the like of which none has ever seen. 
And a light from above... filled all the streets thereof: and certain winged hosts, each 
to itself a light, abode there singing in melodies never heard by mortal ears." 

a Cf. the description of Chaos in Spenser's Hymne in Honour of Love, 57 84. 

4 Cf. the English Faust-book (1592) where Faustus asks when Hell was made and 
Mephistophiles replies " Faustus, thou shalt know, that before the fall of my lord 
Lucifer was no hell, but even then was hell ordained" (Thorns' English Prose 
Romances^ III. 185). 



662 PARADISE LOST. 

after the proclamation in v. 600 15, they have 'revealed their 
rebellious spirit. To form Hell a part of the abyss has been taken. 
In II. 1 002, 1003, Chaos complains that his realm has leen encroached 
upon by Hell "stretching far and wide beneath." Re und Hell runs 
a wall of fire (l. 61, 62) ; overhead spreads a fiery vault CT cope (i. 298, 
34 5 34^)' At the descent of the angels Hell lies open to receive them 
(VI. 50 55) ; then the roof closes (vi. 874, 875), and they are prisoners. 
Henceforth the only outlet from Hell into Chaos is through certain 
gates, the charge whereof is assigned to Sin (n. 643 et seq. ). At her 
side, as protector, stands Death, ready with his dart to meet all comers 
(n. 853 55). To please Satan (her sire), Sin opens the gates. 
Afterwards she cannot shut them; and all who will may pass to 
and fro between Hell and Chaos. Later on (when the bridge from 
Hell has been made) this change becomes terribly significant. As to 
the inside of Hell, we hear of a pool of fire (l. 52, 221); dry land 
that burns like fire (l. 227 29) ; and drear regions of excessive 
cold and heat, intersected by rivers (ll. 574 et seq.). Here again the 
picture is largely traditional, owing, no doubt, much to Dante, ho 
in turn owed much to the apocalyptic descriptions before mentioned. 
Immediately after the expulsion of Satan the World is created 
(VII. 131 et seq.). By "the World" is meant the whole Universe of 
Earth, seas, stellar bodies and the framework wherein they are set. 
The Son of God goes forth into the abyss (vn. 218 et seq.), and with 
golden compass marks out the limits of this World ; so that Chaos is 
again despoiled of part of his realm (as he laments, u. 1001 1006). 
The new World is a globe or hollow sphere, suspended in the abyss, 
and at its topmost point fastened by a golden chain (see II. 1051, note) 
to Heaven. In u. 1004 1006 Chaos tells Satan of this Universe: 

" another world, 

Hung o'er my realm, linked in a golden chain 
To that side Heaven from whence your legions fell." 
The length of this chain, i.e. the distance of the World from the 
Empyrean, is not stated, I believe; but the distance was not compara- 
tively very great (u. 1051 53, vil. 618). 

Also, between the globe (again, on its upper side, i.e. that nearest 
to the Empyrean) and the gate of Heaven there stretches a golden stair ; 
used by good angels for descent and ascent when they are despatched to 
Earth on any duty such as that which Raphael discharges in books 
V. VIII. This stair (suggested by Jacob's dream?) is not always let 
clown (in. 501 18). And hard by the point where the golden stair 
touches the surface of the globe there is in later times, after the fall 
of man another stair (or rather bridge), which leads, not upward to the 



APPENDIX. 663 

Empyrean, but downward to Hell: i.e. it extends over the portion 
of Chaos that intervenes between Hell and the World (n. 1024 
33, X. 282 et seq.}. This bridge 1 , the work of Sin and Death, is 
used by evil angels when they would come from Hell (its gates being 
open) to Earth "to tempt or punish mortals" (n. 1032). 

Hence a good angel and an evil, visiting mankind simultaneously, 
the one descending the golden stair, the other ascending the bridge, 
will meet at this point of the surface of the globe. And to enter the 
globe, i.e. to get through its outer surface to the inside, each must pass 
through the same aperture in the surface, and descend by the same 
passage into the interior : as Milton explains in book in. There he 
describes how Satan journeys through Chaos, till he reaches and walks 2 
on the outer surface of the World (in. 418 30). But how to pass to 
the interior? The surface is impenetrable, and there seems to be no 
inlet. Then suddenly the reflection of the golden stair which chances 
to be let down directs his steps to the point where the stair and the 
bridge come into contact with the globe, and here he finds what he 
seeks an aperture in the surface by which he can look down into the 
interior. Further, there is at this aperture a broad passage plunging 
right down into the World being, really, a continuation of the 
golden stair. Thus Satan, standing on the bottom step of the stair, 
and looking straight up, sees overhead the gate of Heaven ; and 
looking straight down, sees the interior of the globe, leagues beneath 
(III. 526 et seq.}. 

Similarly on the seventh day of the Creation the angels, gazing from 
Heaven's gate down the stair and down the broad passage which 
continues the stair, see, as Satan did, into the new-made World 
(vil. 617 19): 

"not far, founded in view 
On the clear hyaline, the glassy sea 3 ." 

In short, at the point in the surface of the globe nearest to the 
Empyrean, there is a choice of ways: the stair leading to Heaven; 
the bridge to Hell; and the broad passage to the interior of the 
World: 



1 In the English Faust-look t 1592 (Thorns' English Prose Romances, HI. 194), 
Mephistophiles says: " We have also with us in hell a ladder, reaching of exceeding 
highth, as though the top of the same would touch the heaven, to which the damned 
ascend to seek the blessing of God, but through their infidelity, when they are at 
very highest degree, they fall down again into their former miseries." With the last 
part of this extract cf. P. L. HI. 484 et seq. It seems to me highly probable that 
Milton studied the Faust-book (which was immensely popular), as well as Marlowe's 
dramatic adaptation of it; see n. 596 603, V. 671, notes. 

2 i.e. like a fly moving up a lamp-globe (Masson). 
i . 8 i.e. the Crystalline Sphere. 



664 PARADISE LOST. 

"in little space 

The confines met of empyrean Heaven 
And of this World, and on the left hand Hell 
With long reach interposed ; three several ways, 
In sight, to each of these three places led 1 ." 

And descending the broad passage what would an angel find in the 
interior of the globe? What is this globe as Milton, following the 
astronomy of his 2 time, has described it? 

The globe as then conceived may best be likened (in Plato's 
comparison 3 ) to one of those puzzles or boxes in which are contained 
a number of boxes of gradually lessening size : remove the first, and 
you shall find another inside, rather smaller: remove the second, and 
you shall come on a third, still smaller: and so on, till you reach 
the centre the kernel, as it were, round which the different boxes 
were but successive shells. Now, of the globe of the World the 
Earth (they said) is the kernel (is it not often called 'the centre 4 '?); 
and a stationary body itself it is encased by numerous shells or 
Spheres : the number of the Spheres being a subject of dispute and 
varying in the different astronomical systems. Milton, accepting 5 for 
the purposes of his epic the Ptolemaic system as expanded by the 
astronomer Alphonsus X. of Castille, recognises ten Spheres. A 
Sphere, it should be noted, is merely a circular region of space 
not necessarily of solid matter. Indeed, of the ten Spheres only one, 
the Primum Mobile, appears in Milton's description to consist of some 
material substance. Seven of them are the Spheres of the planets, 
i.e. the orbits in which the planets severally move. 



1 x. 320 24. 

8 I do not mean to imply that the Ptolemaic system was still generally believed in 
at the time when '. L. was published, but that it satisfied Elizabethan writers, of 
whom Milton was the last. 

" On the slowness with which the Coperaican theory was diffused, and especially 
Bacon's opposition to it, see Whewell's History of the Inductive Sciences, i. 404 
12, ed. 1847. Copernicus died in 1543, and his opinions were introduced into 
England mainly through Giordano Bruno, who came over about 1583" (note in 
Clarendon Press ed. of The Advancement of Learning, p. 294). 

s See the Myth of Er in the Republic 617, 618; and the note on Arcades, 64, where 
the passage is translated. 

* Cf. perhaps i. 686; and certainly The Winter's Tale, n. i. 102, Troilns 
and Cressida, i. 3. 85. 

6 He was evidently familiar with the Copernican system (cf. iv. 592 97, vni. 130 
40, notes); and the question has been asked why he did not follow it in the poem. 
The Copernican theory was new, without a scrap of literary association and with no 
poetic terminology: whereas the Ptolemaic view and its delightful fictions as to the 
Spheres, their harmonies, and the like, had become a tradition of literature, expressed 
in terms that recalled Marlowe and Shakespeare and Jonson and the sacri vates of 
English verse. To surrender this poetic heritage merely out of deference to science 
had been impossible pedantry a perverse concession to the cold philosophy that 
" empties the haunted air and unweaves the rainbow " (Lamia). 



APPENDIX. 665 

The order of the Spheres, which fit one within the other 1 , is, if we 
start from the Earth as the stationary centre 2 of the Universe, as 
follows: first, the Spheres of the planets successively the Moon, 
Mercury, Venus, the Sun, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn ; then, outside the 
last of these (i.e. Saturn), the Firmament or Cselum Stellatum, in which 
are set the ' fixed stars ' ; then, outside the Firmament, the Crystalline 
Sphere ; and last, the Primum Mobile enclosing all the others. Com- 
pare the famous lines (481 83) in book ill. describing the passage 
of the souls of the departed from Earth to Heaven : 

"They pass the planets seven, and pass the fixed, 
And that crystalline sphere whose balance weighs 
The trepidation talked, and that first moved." 

It remains to note three or four points in these lines. Milton treats 
the Sun and Moon as planets (v. 17177, x. 651 58). Compare 
Troilus and Cressida, I. 3. 89, "the glorious planet Sol," and Antony 
and Cleopatra, v. 2. 240, 241 : 

"now the fleeting moon 
No planet is of mine." 

The 'fixed stars' are referred to four times in the poem but only once 
(v. 176) with the word 'star' added: in the other places (111.481, x. 
661) they are called simply "the fixed " or " fixed " (v. 621). Though 
they are unmoved their Sphere revolves round the Earth, moving from 
East to W r est, completing a revolution in twenty-four hours, and carrying 
with it the seven inner Spheres 3 . The rapid motion of this Sphere is 
glanced at in V. 176 ("their orb 4 that flies"). The Crystalline Sphere 
and the Primum Mobile were not included in the original Ptolemaic 
system. They were added later, to explain certain phenomena which 
the earlier astronomers had not observed, and for which their theories 
offered no explanation. Thus the supposed swaying or "trepidation" 
of the Crystalline Sphere was held to be the cause of the precession of 
the equinoxes. This Sphere is described as a vast expanse of waters 
(see the note on VII. 261 74). It encircles the eight inner Spheres. 
The original notion may perhaps be traced to the waters "above the 
firmament" in Genesis i. 7. Compare the picture in VII. 270, 271 of the 
World 

"Built on circumfluous waters calm, in wide 
Crystalline ocean." 

1 Cf. Marlowe's Faustus, vi. 38, 39 : 

"As are the elements, such are the spheres, 
Mutually folded in each other's orb." 

2 Cf. vni. 32, " the sedentary Earth " ; it is " self-balanced " (vii. 242)= " upon her 
centre poised " (v. 579). 

3 These have separate motions of their own. 

* 'Orb' and 'Sphere' are interchangeable terms when it suits Milton. 



666 PARADISE LOST. 

The main purpose that this "ocean" serves is to protect the Earth from 
the evil "influences" of Chaos; those "fierce extremes" of temperature 
which might penetrate through the outside shell (the Primum Mobile] 
and " distemper" the whole fabric of the Universe, did not this wall of 
waters interpose (vn. 269 73). The whole idea is well illustrated by 
the following passage from a curious old work entitled The Treasurie 
of Auncient and Moderne Times (1613): 

"Aboue the Firmament, is the Heauen Christaline, or watry, 
which learned men are of the minde, that it was created by God aboue 
the other Heauens : to the ende that it might mitigate the great heat 
which the other Heauens acquired by their motions, and by the Stars 
being in them." 

Keightley says that this Sphere was also known as the " Glacial." 
Last comes the Primum Mobile 1 , the " first 2 convex" of the World, 
i.e. the outside case of our box or puzzle. It is made, as we saw, of 
hard matter ; but for its crust of substance Chaos would break in on 
the World, and Darkness make inroads (in. 419 21). The first 
moved itself, it communicates motion to the nine inner Spheres. In 
Elizabethan literature allusions to it are not infrequent : we will con- 
clude by giving three. Compare Spenser, Hymnt of Heavenly Beaut 'ie: 

"these heavens still by degrees arize, 
Until they come to their first Movers bound, 
That in his mightie compasse doth comprize, 
And carry all the rest with him around"; 
and Marlowe, Faustus*: 

"He views the clouds, and planets, and the stars, 
The tropic zones, and quarters of the sky, 
From the bright circle of the horned moon 
Even to the height of Primum Mobile"  

and Bacon, Of Seditions and Troubles : "for the motions of the greatest 
persons in a government ought to be as the motions of the planets under 
Primum Mobile" 



1 Dante's prinio giro {Pnrgatorio, I. 15); see also the Paradiso, . 123 and xm. 
24, where he makes the Primum Mobile represent the swiftest motion, and xxx. 107. 
He uses the expression "the First Mover" (lo Motor prinio) in a different sense, viz. 
as a synonym of "The Almighty" {Purgatorio, xxv. 70). 

a in. 419. To Satan coming from Chaos it is the nm ; in our calculation, as we 
started from the Earth, it Is the last. 

3 Scene vi. chorus, 5 18, in the third Quarto, 1616; the passage is not in the two 
earlier editions of 1604 and 1609 (Ward). 



APPENDIX. 667 



B. 

ON THE CHARACTER OF MILTON'S SATAN. 

I have reserved for this Appendix notice of some points in Milton's 
delineation of the character of Satan. First, as to the rank which 
Milton assigns to him before his revolt, and the cause of that revolt. 
Milton speaks of Satan as an archangel 1 "if not the first Archangel" 
(v. 660) : that is, he is inclined to give Satan pre-eminence over all 
angelic beings. But this pre-eminence is not emphasised so much as we 
might have expected. 

The immediate cause of the rebellion in Heaven is the proclamation 
that all should worship the Messiah as their Head (v. 600 15). Satan 
resents the command, conceiving himself " impaired" (v. 665) thereby; 
and he makes its pretended injustice a means of drawing away a 
third part of the angels from their allegiance. They are equal, he 
says, to the Messiah : self-begotten, not created : not liable to pay 
worship; and so, playing on their pride, he wins them (v. 772 
802, 853 69). Meantime, in his own heart an even stronger motive 
is at work ; to wit, jimbition to be himself equal to the Deity 
nay, superior. He not only disclaims submission to the Son : he 
strives "against the throne and monarchy" (i. 42) of the Almighty 
Himself; and it is as the foe rather of the Father than of the Son that 
the great archangel is set before us in Paradise Lost. 

Touching both matters there was much tradition, whereof it may be 
interesting to cite two or three illustrations from popular works 2 with 
which Milton is likely to have been familiar. To take, for example, 
the English Faiist-book Faustus asks: "But how came lord and 
master Lucifer 3 to have so great a fall from Heaven? Mephistophiles 
answered, My lord Lucifer was a fair angel, created of God as im- 
mortal, and being placed in the Seraphims 4 , which are above the 
Cherubims, he would have presumed upon the Throne of God... upon 
this presumption the Lord cast him down headlong, and where (i.e. 
whereas) before he was an angel of light, now dwells in darkness 5 ." 

1 Contrast the first extract from the Faust-book, later on. 

2 I choose three works each of which may, I think, be regarded as a rtsuwe of 
many of the current traditions of demonology. Two of the books the Faust-book, 
1592, and Scot's Discourse on Devils, 1584 were extremely popular, and personally 
I believe that Milton had studied both. Scot devotes several chapters to "Lucifer 
and his fall." The third work Heywood's Hierarchie, 1635 is very serviceable 
to an editor of Paradise Lost. 

3 A common name of Satan. 

* The highest of the Hierarchies. We may note the forms ' Seraphims 
' Cherubims.' 

5 Thorns' English Prose Romances, in. 184. 



668 PARADISE LOST. 

Later on Faustus returns to the subject, enquiring "in what estimation 
his lord Lucifer was, when he was in favour with God " : also touching 
his form and shape: to which Mephistophiles replies, "My lord 
Lucifer... was at the first an angel of God, yea he was so of God 
ordained for shape, pomp, authority, worthiness, and dwelling, that he 
far exceeded all the other creatures of God, and so illuminated that he 
far surpassed the brightness of the sun, and all the stars... but when he 
began to be high minded, proud and so presumptuous, that he would 
usurp the seat of God's Majesty, then was he banished 1 ." 

The Faust-book, it will be seen, agrees with Milton on both points; 
while, as regards one of them Satan's rank it is more explicit than 
Paradise Lost. Equally explicit is Heywood's Hierarchic of the Blessed 
Angels (1635). There (p. 336) we read that of the angels Lucifer 
was first-created and chief: 

"As he might challenge a prioritie 
In his Creation, so aboue the rest 
A supereminence, as first and best." 

Heywood mentions Michael, Raphael, and Gabriel, and adds 
(p. 337) that great as they were, 

" Yet aboue these was Lucifer instated, 

Ilonor'd, exalted, and much celebrated." 

Reginald Scot goes even further, remarking 2 that according to the 
teaching of some divines Satan even after his fall exceeded in power 
any of the angelic host. It seems to me therefore something strange 
that Milton did not unequivocally invest Satan with superiority over 
all the angels. 

As to Satan's motive Heywood 8 differs from Milton, making jealousy 
of mankind the cause ; while Scot writes 4 : "Our schoolemen differ much 
in the cause of Lucifer's fall [some alleging one thing, some another, 
while] others sale, that his condemnation grew hereupon, for that he 
challenged the place of the Messias." This accords more with Paradise 
Lost, v. 66 1 65. 

For Milton Satan is the type of pride. The type was already fixed. 
As an epithet of Lucifer 'proud' had passed into a proverb. Thus 
Gower said 5 : 

" For Lucifer with him that felle 
Bar pride with him into helle. 
There was pride of to grete cost 
Whan he for pride hath heven lost"; 
and Marlowe 6 : 

Thorns, in. 187. 
Nicholson's ed., ji. 425. 
P; 339- * P- 423. 

Confessto Amant.'s, book I. 
Fauxtus, m. 67 69. 



APPENDIX. 669 

"Faust. How comes it, then, that he is prince of devils? 
Meph. O, by aspiring pride and insolence ; 

For which God threw him from the face of heaven"; 
and Greene 1 : 

"proud Lucifer fell from the heavens, 



Lucifer and his proud-hearted friends 
Were thrown into the centre of the earth." 

Dante had made him il primo superbo that is, the archetype of all 
pride (Paradiso, xix. 46; see also xxix. 55 57). 

Milton therefore did not wholly conceive or create the character of 
the arch-rebel. Tradition, literary no less than theological, prescribed 
the dominant idea in that nature : enough if Milton developed the idea 
in harmony with the design of his poem. This he did. He depicts 
Satan as an embodiment of the spirit of pride and ambition 2 : not the 
ambition which is an honourable desire of praise that last infirmity of 
noble minds but the fevered lust for power which springs from over- 
mastering self-esteem. In Satan this spirit of egotism is the poison 
that permeates his whole being, vanquishing and vitiating all that 
is good in him. 

For at the outset of the action of Paradise Lost Satan has much that 
is noble and attractive in his nature. To have made him wholly evil 
had repelled, and lessened the interest of the poem, which turns, in no 
slight degree, on the struggle between the good and evil elements in 
him. Indeed, this very pride is not without its good aspect. Herein 
lies the motive power that nerves him at every crisis to face insuperable 
difficulties ; to cherish immortal hope though hope of revenge ; and 
to adventure "high attempts." 

On the other hand, it is this same spirit that drives him onward to 
his final fall. If at any moment he is minded to repent and submit 
through pity for the friends whom he has ruined, or mankind whom 
he schemes to ruin, or himself through sense of his ingratitude (iv. 
42 45) towards the Almighty whatever the motive relentless, resist- 
less egotism sweeps aside compunction, and denies him retreat. To 
sue for grace were to humble himself in the eyes of his followers and 
in his own : which must not be (iv. 79 86). 

Steadily does Milton keep this idea before us. There is no possi- 
bility of missing or mistaking his intention. The very word ' pride ' 
recurs 3 like some persistent refrain, ringing clearest at the great crises, 
the fateful moments when the action of the epic enters on a fresh stage. 
There are moments of relenting : as when in the fourth book (27 et sey.) 

1 Friar Bacon, ix. 59, 65, 66. 

2 Cf. Satan's own words in iv. 40. 

* Cf. i. 36, 58, 527, 572, 603 with many other examples. 



670 PARADISE LOST. 

Satan looks down upon Eden from his resting-place on Mount Niphates, 
and a brief while is inclined to give up his attempt and seek re- 
admission into Heaven; or as when in the ninth book (455 72) he sees 
Eve in the Garden and is touched by her beauty and innocence, and 
disarmed of his ill thoughts. Always, however, the end is the same : 
" the hot hell " of pride in his heart breaks anew into flame ; and he 
goes forward to his work 1 . Had not pride led him to undertake it? 

Satan's resolve to compass the fall of man is prompted by several 
feelings each a phase of self-esteem. There is jealousy. Man has 
usurped his place dispossessed him and his followers. At sight of 
Adam and Eve he exclaims (iv. 358 60) : 

"O Hell! what do mine eyes with grief behold? 
Into our room of bliss thus high advanced 
Creatures of other mould, Earth-born perhaps ! " 

The same feeling finds expression in almost the same words later on 
(ix. 148, 149). That others should receive favour from the Almighty 
and, as he thinks, at his expense wounds his pride. 

Again, there is desire to assert his supremacy by undertaking an 
office from which the mightiest of his followers recoil in fear. Nowhere 
does Satan stand forth so eminent and sublime ' ' with monarchal pride " 
as in the scene in the second book where he proffers himself for the 
great enterprise. The counsel of Beelzebub has been applauded by all 
(386 89): but who will carry it out? None dare: and then Satan, 
proclaiming his readiness, once more confirms his sovereignty. Here 
too pride has ruled. 

But the strongest motive remains : desire 

"To wreak on innocent frail Man his loss 

Of that first battle, and his flight to Hell 3 ." 

"To spite the great Creator" (n. 384, 385) he will bring ruin on the 
earth and its inhabitants : which, if not victory, were revenge. The 
notion flatters his self-conceit. It is born of the old pride. And 
Milton dwells on it with fitting insistence 3 . 

Is Satan the 'hero' of Paradise Lost! We might think so did we 
not read beyond the first four books. But to trace his history in the poem 
to its inglorious close is to dispel the impression. Milton can scarcely 
intend that we should regard as 'hero' as worthy of sustained admira- 
tion one who passes from the splendour of archangelic being to the 
state of a loathsome reptile 4 . The hideous metamorphosis in x. 504 
3 2 is the necessary contrast to those scenes at the beginning of the epic 
in which the great rebel does appear in heroic grandeur : and we must 
look on both pictures. If Paradise Lost narrates the fall of man, it 

1 Cf. Mr Stopford Brooke's admirable Study of Milton, p. 148. 

a iv. it, 12. Cf. vi. 905, 906. * Cf. Satan's words in ix. 16371. 



APPENDIX. 671 

narrates too and no less clearly the fall of man's tempter. The 
self-degradation of Satan is complete : outward and inward : of the 
form and of the spirit: a change ever for the worse of shape and 
mind and emotion. 

There is the outward sign. Before his expulsion he is pre-eminently 
a lustrous being, clothed with ethereal radiance and glory so much 
does his name "Lucifer" argue 1 . And afterwards he retains some- 
thing of this "original brightness," though much has passed from 
him (i. 97, 591 94). But gradually what was left decreases in pro- 
portion as the evil in him prevails : so that Uriel perceives the foul 
passions that dim his face (iv. 124 30), while Gabriel marks his 
"faded splendour wan" (iv. 870), and the Cherub Zephon taunts him 
therewith (iv. 835 40). Equal is his loss of physical force. On the 
fields of Heaven he does not fear to meet Michael in combat (vi. 246 
et seq.): in the Garden of Eden he doubts himself a match for Adam: 
"Foe not informidable ! exempt from wound, 
I not; so much hath Hell debased, and pain 2 
Enfeebled me, to what I was in Heaven." 

In fact, he is glad that he has to deal with the woman not the man 
(ix. 47988). 

Nor this because of lost strength alone. He shuns the "higher 
intellectual" of Adam (ix. 483), who would be better able than Eve to 
see through his arguments and so resist temptation. He is conscious 
of his own decline in intellect. The strong intelligence which inspires 
his speeches in the first two books has degenerated, by perverse use, 
into mere sophistical slyness, a base cunning even as wine may lose 
its savour and turn to vinegar. He is no more the mighty-minded 
archangel: he is naught but the serpent "subtlest beast of all the 
field." Lastly, every impulse in him towards good has died out. The 
element of nobility that redeemed his character at the outset from 
absolute baseness has been killed. In evil he moves and has his being, 
so that himself confesses "all good to me becomes bane"; and in 
destroying lies his sole delight (ix. 114 30). 

Hardly therefore shall we believe that Milton meant us to see in the 
fallen and ever-falling archangel the hero of Paradise Lost. One feels, 
rather, that there is a break at the end of the fourth book and that 
thenceforth the continuity of Satan's characterisation is truer to theology 
than poetry. The hero, if there be one, is Adam, in whom suffering 
works a purification that promises nobler things to come ; or Messiah. 

1 Cf. vn. 131, note, and the second extract from the Faust-book, and Marlowe, 
Faust us, v. 155 : 

"beautiful 

As was bright Lucifer before his fall." 
8 See i. 55, vi. 327, notes. 



672 PARADISE LOST. 



PARADISE LOST, i. 36175; n. 274, 275, 397402. 

These 1 passages (with several in Paradise Regained] are illustrated 
by the following in Hooker's Ecclesiastical Polity ', I. iv. 3: "The fall 
of the angels was pride. Since their fall, their practices have been the 
clean contrary unto those before mentioned. For being dispersed, some 
in the air, some on the earth, some in the water, some 3 among the 
minerals, dens, and caves, that are under the earth ; they have by all 
means laboured to effect a universal rebellion against the laws, and as 
far as in them lieth utter destruction of the works of God. These 
wicked spirits the heathens honoured instead of gods, both generally 
under the name of dii infcri, 'gods infernal'; and particularly, some in 
oracles 3 , some in idols 4 , some as household gods, some as nymphs: in 
a word, no foul and wicked spirit which was not one way or other 
honoured of men as God, till such time as light appeared in the world 
and dissolved the works of the Devil." The interest of this passage is 
that Hooker identifies the fallen angels (i) with the heathen more 
especially classical deities, (2) with the daemons supposed to inhabit 
the four 5 'elements.' This twofold identification accords with the 
apparently universal belief of mediaeval writers. The precise steps 
whereby it was reached cannot perhaps be determined ; but the process 
may have been on this wise. 

The belief in the existence of daemons is as old as Hesiod's time ; 
cf. the Works and Days 121 26. It is found passim in Greek 
philosophy. The character attributed to these daemons varies in the 
different authorities. In a rough generalisation we may say that they 
were regarded as semi-divine powers intermediate between gods and 
men. Their dwelling-place also varies: yEschylus (Perstf 628) de- 
scribes them as xdtviot ; Plato 8 (Cratylus 398 A) as viroxOovioi. The 
theory which assigns the air as their special abode, and which is 
brought forward very prominently in Paradise Regained^ dates from Neo- 



1 I have to thank Mr R. D. Hicks for many of the references used in this sketch ; 
in fact, all the classical material in sections C and D is derived from him. 
8 Cf. Plato's fiai'u.ofes vwoxOovioi. 

3 Cf. the second passage quoted later on from Zeller. 

4 Alluding perhaps to Ps. xcvi. <; see later. 

Hooker omits the daemons of fire (= Philo's TO. nvpiyova. ?). 
' He is quoting Hesiod, . c. (where, however, our texts have <inx66vwt). 



APPENDIX. 673 

Pythagorean writers 1 . Now the tendency of Greek popular superstition 
and of later philosophy was to merge these daemons in the gods : a 
tendency traceable as far back as Democritus 2 . He (says Zeller 3 ) 
"may be regarded as the first who, mediating between philosophers 
and the popular religion, entered upon the course so often pursued in 
after times, viz. that of degrading the gods of polytheism into daemons." 
This course is carried further by the Neo-Pythagoreans for whom, 
"as for the other philosophers of that time, daemons take the place of 
the popular gods in all cases where what is attributed to the gods was 
found irreconcileable with a purer conception of the divinity, and yet 
was not altogether to be denied. Divination 4 proceeded from them, 
expiations were made to them: Timaeus Locrus even affirms that the 
gods committed to them the government of the world" {Zeller 5 ). And 
this identification of gods and daemons is completed in Philo Judseus 6 
and Rabbinical writers. Not to multiply proofs, we may take a single 
illustration which will readily occur to most readers, viz. i Cor. x. 20, 
where St Paul (influenced, I presume, by Rabbinical teaching and 
Greek philosophy) expressly, and appropriately since he is writing to 
Greeks, calls the divinities of the Gentiles 3aix6na7. The notion may 
be traced in many patristic works. 

The next step is the identification of the daemons with the fallen 
angels. This is made by Philo, who treats the daemons as inter- 
mediaries or messengers (ayyeXoi) between God and the world, and 
says that they are the beings whom Moses calls angels oOs aXXoc 
<(>i6(To<j)oi Saiiojas, a77^oi;s Mwia^s efadev 6voj.dfeiv, fvxal 5' tlaiv 
KO.T& rbv dtpa irer6fjLevai 8 . This identification is also a Rabbinical 
doctrine. It suffices for our purpose again to recall St Paul's words in 
Ephes. ii. 2, where Satan, chief of the fallen angels, is termed "the 
prince of the power of the air," i.e. lord of the daemons of the air. 

The daemons, then, having been identified on the one hand with the 
heathen gods, and on the other with the fallen angels, the identification 
of the fallen angels with the heathen gods naturally followed. Hence 

1 i.e. from the first century B.C. onwards. "They imagine the daemons to be 
souls dwelling in the space between the earth and the moon, and occupying, alike in 
virtue of their nature and their abode, a place intermediate between gods and men" 
Zeller {Philosophie dtr Griechen, in. 2, p. 138); he cites various Neo-Pythagoreans, 
summarising their views thus. 

2 Circa 420 B.C. 

Pre-Socratics, English trans., H. p. 289. 

Cf. Hooker, ante; Nat. Ode, 175 (note); P. R. i. 430, 431, where the Saviour 
says to Satan (prince of the daemons), "all oracles by thee are given." 
Philosophie der Griechen, HI. 2, p. 139. 
B.C. 30 A.D. 40 (circa). 

The same word is used in the Septuagint in Psalm xcvi. 5, where the A.V. has 
idols." Cf. Hooker, ante, and P. L. I. 375. 
8 De Gigant. 285 A (263, 7). 

P. L. 43 



674 PARADISE LOST. 

it is common to find all three treated as the same in patristic and 
mediaeval works. This is Hooker's view; it is also Milton's. The 
identity of the fallen angels and the heathen gods is stated so explicitly 
in P. L. i. 361 75 that it were superfluous to dwell on the point. 
The identity of the fallen angels and the daemons 1 is less emphasised 
in P. L. (but see n. 274, 275, 397 402, notes). In P. R. it is con- 
spicuous. As a signal illustration P. R. II. 121 26 may be instanced. 



D. 

PARADISE LOST, I. 51517. 

What are we to understand by the expressions "the middle air" 
(P. L. i. 516) and "the middle region of air" (P. R. n. 117), the 
meaning of which would appear to be the same? Most editors are 
silent on the subject; some interpret "middle'^' between heaven and 
earth.' This view, though possible, does not appear to me wholly 
satisfactory, and I venture to offer another that Milton alludes in both 
places to a theory, evidently current at that time, of the division of the 
air into three regions, and that "middle region" is really a quasi- 
scientific term (media regio} which would be perfectly intelligible to 
all scholars of the i7th century. As to the history of this threefold 
division : the first hints of it that fell in my way were the passage in the 
Adamus Exul of Grotius and one in Jonson's Masque of Hymen (ad fin. ). 
The combined evidence of these led to the conclusion that the three- 
fold partition must have been a conception then recognised : not indeed 
a classical conception, but experience had often shown that in such 
matters Milton's views are post-classical, what one may vaguely call 
' mediaeval.' The kindness of Mr R. D. Hicks enables me to throw 
some light on a doctrine which, in my opinion, fits the two Miltonic 
passages with extreme appositeness. Of the references with which 
Mr Hicks has supplied me space will admit but two or three. 

First, then, the following extracts from the works of Bartholomaeus 
Keckermann 2 , the German savant ', are important as coming from what 
may be considered a compendium of contemporary science. Kecker- 
mann is speaking of the divisions of the air ; and he remarks that there 
are two main theories as to its partition the older and less correct which 

1 i.e. the daemons of all four 'elements not of air alone. 

D. Bartholomtei Kecktrmanni Dantiscani ojxrum omnium qua txstant 
Tomus Primus, Gtnevat. Apud Pttntm Avbertum. MDCXIV. 



APPENDIX. 675 

postulates two regions, the modern and more accurate which recognises 
three. He says: Aristoteles atque adeb veteres Physici locum aeris 
dividunt in Trp6Tepov & detirepov, id est> primum & 'secundiim, sive 
superior em &> inferiorem...Recentiores a^ltem accuratius paulb totiim ill ltd 
spacium (sic) aereum partiti sunt in tres paries sive regiones...Perfectior 
sive accuratior distinctio aeris est in tres regiones> nempe in Supremam, 
Mediam o Infimam. The genesis of this doctrine he traces thus : 
Distinctio ista...ab interpretibus Aristotelis prinmm tradita fuit, nempe 
ab Averroe 1 , a Tktmistio* 6 Simplicio* t 6 deinde latius explicata ab 
Alberto* M. &* aliis Scholasticis, idque potissimum eo fine, ttt doctrina 
meteorum clarior atque illustrior fieret (as for sundry other reasons 5 ). 
He discusses at some length the characteristics of each region; and 
though we are most concerned with what he has to say of the middle 
region (media] his remarks being founded on what Albertus had 
written we may just note that he represents the upper region (supremo) 
as the driest and hottest, and the lowest region (infima) as hot, through 
radiation from the surface of the earth heated by the sun's rays, but also 
moist. Now as to the media regio he writes (i) that it is peculiarly 
cold (a) because vapours collect there from land and sea, (b) because 
of its reaction (aWiTrepo-raffts) against the heat of the upper and lower 
regions ; (2) that, beginning where the sun's rays lose their power its 
lowest point earthwards it reaches to the tops of the loftiest mountains 
its highest point heavenwards. The diameter of this belt of air is 
computed by some at seven English miles. 

Keckermann has referred above to his authorities ; let us glance at 
Albertus Magnus. In his Commentary on the Meteora Albertus has a 
chapter 6 headed, Qiiare non sunt nubes in superiori regione aeris, sed in 
media tantum. Here, after discussing the upper and lower regions, he 
adds, est autem in medio duarum regionum, scilicet superioris cestuosce, 
&* inferioris calidce &* humidce, tertia aeris zona sive regio... quce est 
valde frigida et excellentis frigiditatis. And then he goes on to explain 
how vapour gathers there infra ahissimos monies and condenses and 
forms clouds, so that this middle region is the gathering place for rain 7 . 
Later 8 he writes to the same effect trio, sunt aeris inter stitia> infimum 

A.D. 1120 98. 2 A.D. 330 90. 

Circa A.D. 536. 4 A.D. 1193 1280. 

Cf. op. cit. col. 1446. 

Liberi., Tractatus I., Caput viii. 

Cf. the passage in Jonson ; it is a description of some scenery eised in the 
Masque of Hymen, which represented "the three regions of air" : the middle region 
"all of dark and condensed clouds, as being the proper place where rain, hail, and 
other watery meteors are made " ; or as Averroes puts it in quo fiimt plitvia et nix 
et grando (Meteorologicorum Lib. i., Cap. IV.). 
Libtru., Tract, i., Cap. in. 

432 



676 PARADISE LOST. 

&* medium & suprennim... medium frigidum excellenter & httmidum. 
Now let us summarise the results of these descriptions of the media 
regio, and see how they apply to the Miltonic "middle region." 

(1) The media regio is the place of clouds and heavy vapours; 
cf. P. R. i. 3941, where Satan 

"in mid air 

To council summons all his mighty peers, 
Within thick clouds and dark tenfold involved," 
and P. R. II. 117, where Satan ascends "Up to the middle region of 
thick air." Cf. also the piece In Qttintum Novembris^ 12, where M. 
makes this region the gathering- place of storms : Hie tempestates media 
ciet aere diras (the subject of the verb being Satan) ; and his Latin 
academic "prolusion" De Spherarum Concentu, where he mentions 
media, aeris regio. 

(2) It is peculiarly cold ; and ' cold ' is the precise epithet used in 
P. L. I. 516. Cf. The Death of a Fair Infant, 16, "Through middle 
empire of ftG freezing air. " 

(3) It extends to the top of high mountains ; and Mount Olympus 
is the dwelling-place of the deities who " rule the middle air," P. L. I. 
5I5 5i6. Cf. the Vacation Exercise, 41, 42. 

(4) It is capped by another, perhaps broader, belt of air ; and in 
P. L. i. 517 Milton expressly sneers at the "highest heaven" of the 
classical deities as not being so very high after all which, according to 
the whole system of this theory, is true enough. 

It appears to me therefore that the explanation suggested fits the 
passages at every turn. I imagine that to many of Milton's readers, as 
to many of the spectators of Jonson's Masque, the notion of the three 
regions was perfectly familiar 1 . From the frequency of Milton's own 
references to it we may infer that it appealed to his imagination. 



E. 
PARADISE LOST, I. 58287. 

The enumeration of proper names is a favourite device with M., as 
with many other poets, notably Vergil. Cf. the Nativity Ode, one of his 
earliest poems (1629), P. L. xi. 388 411, P. R. in. 270 et seq. The 

1 It has been pointed out to me that this conception of the media regio is 
expounded in Sylvester's Du Bartas, a work so familiar to Milton : see Grosart's 
ed., i. 31. For another illustrative passage, cf. Burton's Anatomy, ninth ed., i. 380. 



APPENDIX. 677 

charm of such passages lies in the musical sound of the names, in 
their historical or literary associations, and in the impression of vague 
remoteness and mystery that they convey. Bentley, however, with 
something more than his usual infelicity as a critic of M., omitted 
lines 579 87 (fr m "what resounds" to " Fontarabbia ") as being 
"Romantic Trash a heap of barbarous Words." Even Keightley 
opined that the names are chosen " somewhat at random " : whereas, in 
truth, each has been carefully selected by M. for its associations. 

In " all who since " Milton is thinking mainly of the great Italian 
poems of chivalry with their accounts of contests between the Christians 
("baptized") and Saracens ("infidel" see 763 66, note): e.g. 
Pulci's Morgante Maggiore, 1481 see the Areopagitica, P. W. II. 64; 
Boiardo's Orlando Innamorato, 1495, recast by Berni, 1541 see P. JR. 
III. 338 43; Ariosto's Orlando Furioso, 1516, of which there was a 
famous English version by Sir John Harington, 1591 see the extract 
from Ariosto in Of Reformation, P. W. n. 383 ; and Tasso's Gerusakmme 
Liberata. In a letter from Florence (1638), and elsewhere, M. manifests 
his delight in Italian literature. 

Aspramont (583) is situate 6 miles north of Nice. In Hexham's 
Mercator (1636) I find it marked in the map of Provence, and 
again in that of Italy. The castle belonging to the great family of the 
Counts of Aspramont may still be seen. Probably the literary allusion 
is to the Orlando Furioso, xi I. 43, where Aspramont is mentioned as 
the scene of a feat of arms performed by Orlando ; and M. may have 
known an Italian poem, entitled UAspramonte and published at 
Venice in 1532 itself, possibly, based on the French 'Chanson de 
Geste ' Aspremont) which deals with Charlemagne's conquest of Apulia. 
In any case, it is pretty clear that ' Aspramont ' was a name familiar to 
readers of medireval romances of chivalry : and does not Scott tell us of 
jousts at the castle of Aspramont for the hand of the ' Lady of Aspra- 
monte' (Count Robert of Paris)"} Also, as M. in his journey to Italy, 
rejecting the route by Marseilles to Genoa which Sir Henry Wotton 
recommended (see Comus), passed through Nice (so he says in 
the Defensio Secunda), he may conceivably have visited the famous 
castle, and viewed the scene of the exploits of Orlando and other 
knights. The notion that Asprement in the Netherlands is meant 
need only be mentioned to be dismissed. 

Montalban, or Montauban, is another famous name. It was the 
castle, in Languedoc, of the Knight Renaud, the Rinaldo of Pulci's 
Morgante Maggiore and Boiardo's Orlando Innamorato. In the English 
romance "The Foure Sonnes of Aymon" (published by Caxton, about 
1489), Montalban is constantly mentioned as the scene of conflicts be- 



68 PARADISE LOST. 

tween Charlemagne's troops and Renaud who is besieged there (see the 
Early English Text Society's ed., pp. 395422). Rodd in his Spanish 
Ballads (1812) gives one "The Ancient Ballad of Count Claros of 
Montalban" (and another "The Ancient Ballad of the Battle of 
Roncesvalles "). 

In " Damasco " the literary allusion is probably to the Orlando 
Furioso. In Harington's version the 'Argument' to book xvn. says, 
"Mariano at Damaso? tilts " ; stanzas 12 20 of that book describe the 
city, with the meeting of the champions there, and stanzas 58 73 their 
tournaments and jousts. No doubt, too, M. was thinking of Damascus 
as the scene of battles in times of the Crusades ; cf. Greene, Friar 
Bacon, IV. 27, "The virtuous fame discoursed of his deeds. ..Done at 
the Holy Land 'fore Damas' walls," and vin. 113, "that famous 
Prince... Who at Damaso? beat the Saracens." Note that M. uses the 
form * Damasc0 ' here, but ' Damascw.r ' at 468 : the one suggests the 
mediaeval, the other the Scriptural, city. 

In " Marocco " the wars between the Spaniards and the Moors are 
meant. The form Marocco, given in the original editions here and in 
XI. 404, is closer to the Arabic form MarrAkush. 

Trebisond, Gk. Trapezus, in Cappadocia, was the seat of the empire 
of the family of the Grand-Komnenos from A.D. 1204 to 1461, when 
the city was captured by Mohammed. Writers of the Middle Age and 
later historians (Gibbon has only a brief allusion, vn. 327) celebrate 
the extraordinary splendour of the court and magnificence of the city. 
"Never," says the historian of Trebizond, Professor Fallmerayer, "was 
there a land more fitted to provide material for romances of chivalry 
(Rittcrgeschichtcri) " : Trebizond "became in popular romance and in 
the imagination of the Italians and Provencals one of the most famous 
empires of the east, and the rallying point of the youth and flower of 
Asia" (Geschichtc dts Kaiserthums von Trapezunt}. Now the great 
exemplar of this romance associated with Trebizond (whose splendours 
would naturally be reflected on Western Europe through an Italian 
medium) was a heroic novel,  Caloandro, or  Caloandro Fedele, 
written by Giovanni Ambrosio Marini of Genoa, published at Bologna 
in 1641 (but I am not sure that this was the ist ed.), and often reprinted. 
This work, which had some historical basis, was one of the most famous 
romances of the i7th cent. Twice translated into French (by Monsieur 
de Scudery, brother of the novelist, and by the Comte de Caylus), it 
may have been Englished as was another novel by Marini, The 
Desperadoes', and it seems to me quite likely that M. was thinking 
of it here, or at any rate that many of his readers would think of it. 
Those who knew the novel would recall the numerous jousts and 



APPENDIX. 679 

tournaments which take place at the court of Trebizond, e.g. the great 
combat in book XXI. (it is a vast story) between the three champions of 
the princess Tigrinde and the three representatives of the Persian and 
Tartar armies with many similar scenes. It is worth while to add 
that the author (Cardinal Bessarion) of the curious Laus Trapezuntis 
dwells on its tournaments and games as a special feature of the court ; 
and to remember how Scott makes the Templar say to Rebecca, 
" I won him (his horse, Zamor) in single fight from the Soldan of 
Trebizond" (Ivantoe, chap. xliv.). 

In line 585 the historical reference is to the Moorish invaders of 
Spain, the literary to book n. of the Orlando Innamorato> where we 
read how Agramant, * King of Africa,' assembled his troops at Biserta 
(the ancient Utica) for invasion of Christendom, landed in Spain, 
and came up with the army qf Charlemagne, when "a bloody battle 
ensued." 

The event to which M. refers in lines 586, 587, was this : Charle- 
magne, who had entered Spain to attack the Saracens, was retreating 
into France, A.D. 778; his army had to pass through the defile of Ronces- 
valles (or Roncesvaux) in N.W. Spain ; Charlemagne himself, with 
main body, had got through the pass, when the rear-guard, through 
Ganelon's treachery, was attacked in the pass by the Gascons (or 
Basques), and cut to pieces, among those who perished being the 
famous Roland, whose death became the subject of numberless 
* Chansons de Gestes,' such as the great Song of Roland (see Eginhardus, 
Vita Caroli Magni^ cap. 9). 

Fontarabbia is 40 miles from Roncesvalles : why does M. place the 
disaster at the former ? Some will have it that he chose Fontarabbia 
because the name has a very pretty sound, and that "by Fontarabbia " 
was quite accurate enough, in poetry. Some again say that M. 
followed the historian Mariana and 'other Spanish writers.' Mariana, 
however, does not mention Fontarabbia at all, but gives the ordinary 
version, that the battle was at Roncesvalles. There may be some literary 
allusion not yet traced. Scott happily combines the two names, 
Marmioti) VI. 33 : 

" O, for a blast of that dread horn, 
On Fontarabian echoes borne, 

That to king Charles did come, 
When Rowland brave, and Olivier, 
And every paladin and peer, 

On Roncesvalles died." 

It was at Fontarabbia that Wellington forced his way into France 
against Soult, over the ford of the river Bidassoa. 



68O PARADISE LOST. 

M. represents Charlemagne as having fallen in the fight, whereas 
he lived till 814. Here again Milton's authority is not known; 
though Mariana does speak of Charlemagne dying through chagrin at 
his defeat soon after. But perhaps " fell " means ' was overthrown * ; 
as Dante says, "lost the holy emprise" (Inferno, xxxi. 16 18). 

Montaigne introduces the name Fontarabie in a short historical 
anecdote in his Essay (i. xv.) entitled "Of the punishment of 
Cowardise " in Florio's translation (1603). 

It may just be added that "peer" cf. "peerage" is the word 
regularly used of Charlemagne's nobles in the old poems and prose- 
romances translated from the French ; such as Caxton's Lyfe of Charles 
the grete of France (1485) and the Fonre Sonnes of Aynion (1489, 
Caxton), both reprinted by the Early English Text Society. Cf. Huon 
of Bnrdeux, where it is said that at the battle of Roncesvalles "al y 
xii peres of france were slayne, except one " (p. 2). 



F. 
PARADISE LOST, I. 737. 

According to a mediaeval belief the Heavenly beings were divided 
into three Hierarchies, and each Hierarchy was subdivided into three 
Orders or Choirs. These Orders comprised the Seraphim, Cherubim and 
Thrones (0p6voi), forming the first Hierarchy; Dominations (KuptirTjrej), 
Virtues (5wdtets) and Powers (^ou<rcu), forming the second; Princi- 
palities (dpxai), Archangels and Angels, forming the third. This 
system was deduced, in the main, from St Paul's words in Ephes. i. 21 
and Colos. i. 16. First formulated in the treatise irepl TTJI ovpavias 
Icpapxio-s, which was long attributed, though falsely, to Dionysius the 
Areopagite, the notion had great influence in the Middle Ages; cf. 
Dante, Paradise, X. 115 17, XXVin. 98 126. Allusions to it are 
frequent in Elizabethan writers. Works from which many illustrations 
of the system might be quoted are: Batman vppon Bartholome (1582), 
Reginald Scot's Discoverie of Witchcraft (1584), Thomas Watson's 
Eglogue (1590), the Faust-book (1587), Spenser's Fowre Hymnes 
(Heavenly Love and Heavenly Beautie), Bacon, Advancement of 
Learning, I. vi. 3, Drummond, Flowers of Sion (Works, II. 42, 51), 
Sir Thomas Browne, Religio Medici, I. Iviii., and Heywood's Hierarchic 
of the Blessed Angels (1635), which deals with the subject at great 
length. 



APPENDIX. 68 1 

Milton accepted l the tradition and made it the basis of the whole 
angelical system of Paradise Lost. 

Each of the Orders possessed some special quality. The Seraphim 
were the "burning" lustrous beings; cf. Spenser, An Hymne of Heavenly 
fieautie, 95, 96 : 

"And those eternall burning Seraphins, 

Which from their faces dart out fierie light." 

This conception, due probably to the false derivation of Seraphim from 
a root signifying 'to burn,' determines Milton's choice of epithets for 
this Order of Hierarchies. It is a common allusion in the poets ; cf. the 
Essay on Man, I. 109, 1 10 (of the " poor Indian ") : 
" To be, contents his natural desire, 

He asks no angel's wings, no Seraph's fire"; 

and again 277, 278. So the Seraphim "are represented in medieval 
art with the colour of flame or crimson." 

The Cherubim had a wondrous power of vision : hence their main 
duty in Paradise Lost is to keep watch. See IV. 778 80. And 
through this power of vision they enjoyed in a peculiar degree the 
Visio Beatifica or faculty of " contemplating " the Deity. In the words 
of the treatise irepl TTJS iepapxla-s they were distinguished 5ia TO OCOTTTIKOV 
avTu>i> Kal BewprjTiKdif. And this notion is the key to that difficult line 
(54) in  Penseroso, " The Cherub Contemplation." 

The archangels were, as their name implied, the "chief messengers" 
of the Almighty and the intermediaries between him and Man. Cf. 
Reginald Scot, "As for archangels, they are sent onlie about great and 
secret matters"; and Heywood, "The Archangels are Embassadors, 
great matters to declare." Hence Milton makes Raphael in book v. 
and Michael in books XI., xn., each one of the seven archangels 
referred to in in. 648 53, the bearers of messages and charges from 
the Almighty to Adam. 

One other point in which Milton follows mediaeval tradition with 
regard to the Heavenly beings may be noticed. Descriptions like 
those in book in. 625 28 and 636 42 are purely traditional. We 
must compare them with the presentment of angels in works of early 
Christian art. Poets and painters alike drew upon religious tradition 
and expressed it by certain conventional details. And this presentment 
of angelic beings contained a considerable element of symbolism. In 
Batman vppon Bartholome, II. iii., iv., there is a long discourse on the 

1 Thus in The Reason of Church Government, I. 2, he says, " the angels them- 
selves. ..are distinguished and quaternioned into their celestial princedoms and 
satrapies," P. W. n. 442. He several times uses the special terms "Orders" and 
"Hierarchies" cf. P. L. i. 737, v. 591, vn. 192; while the titles "Seraphim," 
"Thrones," "Dominations," "Virtues" etc. occur constantly. 



682 PARADISE LOST. 

attributes which painters assign to angels and on their symbolical signi- 
ficance. The following brief extracts from it illustrate Milton's pictures 
of Uriel and the " stripling Cherub ": " When Angells are paynted with 
long lockes and crispe haire, thereby is understoode their cleane 
affections and ordinate thoughts. For the hayre of the head be- 
tokeneth thoughts and affections that doe spring out of the roote of 
thought and minde...And they be painted beardles: for to take con- 
sideration and heede, that they passe never the state of youth, neyther 
waxe feeble in vertues, neither faile for age...Truely they be paynted 
feathered and winged... [as a sign that] they be lifted up in effect and 
knowledge, and rauished to the uttermost contemplation of the loue 
of God." 



G. 

PARADISE LOST, in. 2226. 

" Drop serene " is a literal rendering of gutta senna, the technical 
Latin term for "complete amaurosis," i.e. amaurosis or disease of the 
optic nerve in its worst form. It involves total blindness. " Suffusion " 
(Greek uir6xw*a Latin suffusio) was also a technical term, employed 
then by medical writers to denote imperfection or loss of sight 
in general, whether caused by cataract or by affection of the nervous 
structure. Blindness of the latter type is sometimes called suffusio nigra. 
Milton's blindness was probably due to amaurosis, since that 
disease commonly makes no external change in the eye. Thus he says 
in the Second Defence , " so little do they [his eyes] betray any external 
appearance of injury, that they are as unclouded and bright as the eyes 
of those who most distinctly see" (P. W. I. 235). 
Cf. also his second Sonnet to Cyriack Skinner : 
" Cyriack, this three years' day these eyes, though clear, 
To outward view, of blemish or of spot, 
Bereft of light, their seeing have forgot." 

His weakness of sight was evidently inherited from his mother. 
Aubrey in his Life of Milton says : " His father read without spectacles 
at 84. His mother had very weake sight." 

Milton undoubtedly believed that his loss of physical eyesight was 
compensated by increased spiritual illumination : 

"So much the rather thou, celestial Light, 
Shine inward, and the mind through all her powers 
Irradiate" (ill. 5153). 
With these lines we may compare a sentence in one of his letters : 



APPENDIX. 683 

"why should I not submit with complacency to this loss of sight, which 
seems only withdrawn from the body without, to increase the sight 
of the mind within?" (P. W. ill. 513). He writes to the same effect 
in the Second Defence : ** Let me then be the most feeble creature alive, 
as long as that feebleness serves to invigorate the energies of my rational 
and immortal spirit ; as long as in that obscurity, in which I am en- 
veloped, the light of the divine presence more clearly shines, then, in 
proportion as I am weak, I shall be invincibly strong ; and in proportion 
as I am blind, I shall see more clearly. O ! that I may thus be perfected 
by feebleness, and irradiated by obscurity. And, indeed, in my blindness, 
I enjoy in no inconsiderable degree the favour of the Deity, who regards 
me with more tenderness and compassion in proportion as I am able to 
behold nothing but himself" (P. IV. I. 239). Cf. Samson Agonistes, 
162, 163 and 1687 89; and Wordsworth, The Excursion, I. 95. 

One of the finest allusions in literature to Milton's affliction is in 
Gray's lines on him in The Progress of Poesy ; as the third couplet of 
them contains a reference to Paradise Lest, ill. 380 82, they may not 
inappropriately be cited here : 

' ' Nor second He, that rode sublime 
Upon the seraph-wings of Extasy, 
The secrets of th' Abyss to spy. 

He pass'd the flaming bounds of Place and Time: 
The living Throne, the sapphire blaze, 
Where Angels tremble, while they gaze, 
He saw; but, blasted with excess of light, 
Clos'd his eyes in endless night." 

Dryden seems to have anticipated Gray in the reference ; cf. The Hind 
and the Panther, I. 64 69 : 

"But gracious God, how well dost Thou provide 
For erring judgments an unerring guide ! 
Thy throne is darkness in the abyss of light, 
A blaze of glory that forbids the sight. 
O teach me to believe Thee thus concealed, 
And search no farther than Thy self revealed." 



H. 
PARADISE LOST, in. 43139. 

The geography of this passage has been criticised adversely on the 
assumption that " Imaus " must mean the Himalayas. A bird flying 
from the Himalayas to the sources of the Ganges would not pass over 



684 PARADISE LOST. 

any part of ' Sericana,' by which, probably, the north-west angle of the 
Chinese Empire was signified. Masson, to meet the supposed difficulty, 
argues that the vulture is not said to start from Imaus : it is only 
" bred" there. But I think that Milton does mean us to regard Imaus 
as the starting-point of the bird's flight. 

" Imaus," however, need not mean the Himalayas in this passage. 
True, the earlier classical geographers applied "Imaus" to the 
Himalayas (the names being cognate) ; but in Ptolemy and later writers 
the name is transferred to the great chain of mountains, the Bolor 
range, which runs through Central Asia from North to South, dividing 
the Chinese Empire from Turkestan. And this later use 1 of " Imaus" 
appears to have been that recognised by geographers of the iyth 
century. Perhaps the best known collection of maps issued in England 
between 1600 and 1650 was the English edition 2 of Mercator's Atlas ^ 
doubtless known to Milton. 

Now, in Mercator's map of Tartaria there is marked a chain of 
mountains called Imaus Mons. It extends, roughly speaking, from 
the north-eastern corner of the modern Afghanistan to the "Frozen 
Ocean," i.e. Arctic Ocean. Its course is due North and South. When 
Milton speaks of "Imaus" which bounds the "roving Tartars" he 
means, I doubt not, this Imaus Mons which is so conspicuous 
in Mercator's Tartaria. And any one who could consult this rare 
Atlas would perceive at once the accuracy of Milton's description. For 
the northern part of Imaus Mons does " bound " the Tartar, sepa- 
rating his country from Russia; and a vulture starting from this 
northern part and flying southward to the Ganges would pass over the 
north-west plains of the Chinese Empire. Judged therefore from the 
1 7th century standpoint the geography of the passage is quite correct. 
Of course, very little was known then about Central Asia. Mercator 
frankly calls it "that vast and unknown region." 

Allusions to the passage occur in the Dunciad^ in. 76, "He [the 
Emperor of China] whose long wall the wandering Tartar bounds," and 
in Thomson's Autumn : 

"From Asian Taurus, from Imaus stretch 'd 
Athwart the roving Tartar's sullen bounds." 

1 Cf. Pliny's Natural History. "Above those, are other Scythians called 
Anthropophagi. ..within a certain vale of the mountaiiie Imaus," Philemon Holland's 
translation, 1601, p. 154. 

- Hexham's, 1636. 



APPENDIX. 685 

I. 

PARADISE LOST, iv. -27579. 

The key to this passage, as Bishop Newton pointed out, is in 
Diodorus Siculus III. 67 70. Diodorus relates various legends as 
to the birth of Dionysus or Bacchus ; amongst them is the following. 

There was a King of Libya named Ammon. He married Rhea y 
daughter of the god Uranus. By a maiden called Amaltheia he had a 
son. To save the mother and child from the jealousy of Rhea, Ammon 
hid them in a place called Nysa, on an island off the Mediterranean 
coast of Libya, not far from the modern Tunis. It was " girt with the 
river Triton " (irepiexof^vrj vird rov Tplruvos iroTaj.ov), and a spot of 
most singular beauty and fertility. Here the infant was brought up 
in a cave ; and Ammon appointed the goddess Athene to guard him 
"against the plots of his step-mother Rhea" (irpos rets ct7r6 TTJJ wrpvias 
'Ptas eTTtjSouXds). The child grew up, showed wonderful wisdom, 
and having invented wine, became the god of wine. He was named 
" Dionysus" from Nysa his place of nurture. 

This monarch Ammon is evidently a kind of deity, and Milton 
identifies him with the god whom the Greeks called Zetts Ammon and 
the Romans Jupiter Ammon, and who is commonly associated with the 
Egyptian sun-god Amon Ra. As in several other passages, Milton 
has followed Diodorus very closely, merely translating one or two sen- 
tences; cf. the references to "the river Triton" and "his step-dame 
Rhea." 

Cham, of course, is identical with Ham, the name of Noah's son ; 
cf. the Septuagint form of Ham, viz. Xci,u, and the Vulgate form, Cham. 
Probably Milton had some patristic authority for the identification of the 
Scriptural Cham or Ham with the " Gentile 1 " deity Ammon, also called 
Hammond : an identification obviously due to the similarity of the names, 
and strengthened by the traditional account that Egypt 3 was colonised 
by the descendants of Ham. Tennyson speaks of " the Chamian oracle 
divine," i.e. the shrine of Cham t meaning the famous temple of Jupiter 

1 Note "Whom Gentiles Ammon call" (iv. 277), i.e. the Greeks and Romans; 
the implied antithesis between "Gentile" and Biblical shows that "Cham" in 276 
refers to a Scriptural character, i.e. Noah's son. 

2 Cf. M. in the Nativity Ode, 203, " The Libyc Hamtnon shrinks his horn." 
8 Cf. Psalm cv. 23, where Egypt is called " the land of Ham." 



686 PARADISE LOST. 

Ammon in the heart of the Libyan desert. And this is the allusion in 
Thomson's lines (Liberty, in) : 

' ' the Libyan sands 

Where Ammon lifts amid the torrid waste 
A verdant isle, with shade and fountain fresh." 
It may be added that romantic, more or less mythical, island-retreats 
like " that Nyseian isle " were an indispensable feature of the literary 
geography of the epic and quasi-epic world. There was, e.g. the 
" Nilotic isle," Meroe (Paradise Regained, iv. 71); "the fairest and 
most famous" of the islands in the Nile, says Sandys, Relation, p. 93. 
Tasso's isle of Armida belonged to much the same category; and 
the enchantress Acrasia was similarly secluded, The Faerie Queene, 
II. 12. See also Comus, 517. 



J- 

PARADISE LOST, VH. 112. 

Milton's invocation is addressed to the Muse of sacred song and 
inspiration the Heavenly power which "taught" Moses on Sinai 
(i. 6 10), and inspired David on Sion (HI. 29 32) and the other 
prophets and singers of Israel. It is to her that he appeals at the 
beginning of the poem " Sing, Heavenly Muse," and there is a special 
appropriateness in lines 6 10. Cf. Addison's remark: "His invo- 
cation to a work which turns in a great measure upon the creation of 
the World, is very properly made to the muse who inspired Moses in 
those books from whence our author drew his subject, and to the Holy 
Spirit who is therein represented as operating after a particular manner 
in the first production of nature." 

As to the character of this divine power whose existence he postu- 
lates, he does not, naturally, speak with definiteness: in I. 17 26 he 
expressly distinguishes her from the Holy Spirit; in P. R. i. 8 17 he 
seems to identify them. 

The important point is that for Milton this " Heavenly Muse " is a 
truly divine power, in whom he believes with a conviction which gives 
intense reality to his invocations. 

With the classical poets (Homer perhaps excepted) the invocation of 
the Muse was, I suppose, merely a literary convention a piece of the 
traditional * machinery ' of poetry : one does not credit Horace with 
much faith in the Calliope whom he begged to "descend from Heaven." 



APPENDIX. 687 

Milton has faith, and when he asks Urania to aid him he means every 
word of his petition. 

It is in virtue too of his assistance by this higher and holier power 
than the classical poets knew of that he speaks of his poetry as soaring 
"above" theirs. Compare vn. 3, 4 and I. 12 15, where, addressing 
the " Heavenly Muse," he says : 

"I 

Invoke thy aid to my adventurous song, 
That with no middle flight intends to soar 
Above the Aonian mount" (i.e. Mt Helicon). 

He does not, I think, intend to suggest that he will surpass, say, 
Vergil as an artist as a master of style and imagery and other qualities 
which constitute the art of poetry; but only that he is filled with a 
higher inspiration to treat of higher things. In fact, his claim is to 
moral, not artistic, superiority ; it resolves itself almost into the differ- 
ence between Christianity and Paganism. We should remember that 
in Milton's eyes the poet is a teacher in the first place, a singer in the 
second : he must write " to God's glory, by the honour and instruction 
of his country," and be "an interpreter and relater of the best andsagest 
things among his own citizens." See the preface to book u. of The 
Reason of Church Government, and cf. the Introduction to this volume. 
The name " Urania" which he assigns to his Muse means, of course, 
1 the Heavenly One,' Gk. otpavla 1 . In classical mythology Urania was 
commonly regarded as the Muse of astronomy; compare a poem on 
" The Muses" by Nicholas Grimald: 

" Uranie, her globes to view all bent, 

The ninefolde heauen observes with fixed face 8 ." 
In these lines Urania evidently typifies astronomy according to the 
ordinary classical conception of her attributes ; and a similar illustra- 
tion might be cited from Sylvester's Du Bartas (Grosart's ed., n. 3). 
In treating Urania otherwise than as the Muse of astronomy Milton had 
been anticipated by other poets. Perhaps the earliest was Dante ; cf. 
the Purgatorio, xxix. 4042 : " Now 'tis meet that Helicon for me 
stream forth and Urania aid me with her choir to set in verse things 3 
hard to conceive." Dante had been followed by English poets. Spenser, 
for example, in The Ttares of the Muses makes her represent the highest 
knowledge "the heavenlie light of knowledge "; while for Drummond 
of Hawthornden she meant, it would seem, the power of spiritual wisdom, 
one section of his poems being entitled " Urania, or Spiritual Poems." 

1 See Hesiod, Theogony 78. 

* Tottel's Miscellany. 1557, e d. Arber, p. 100. 

1 Cf. Milton's Dantesque use of "things," P. L. i. 16. 



688 PARADISE LOST. 

Influenced, no doubt, by Paradise Lost, vil. i et seq., Shelley in Adonais > 
II. iv., and Tennyson in In Memoriam regard Urania as the Muse of 
lofty verse : a conception very similar to Milton's though less dis- 
tinctively religious. And Wordsworth has two directly Miltonic allu- 
sions to Urania ; cf. the invocation in The Recluse : 

" Urania, I shall need 
Thy guidance, or a greater Muse, if such 
Descend to earth or dwell in highest heaven ! " 
and the end of his poem on Ossian : 

"such was blind 
Maeonides of ample mind, 
Such Milton, to the fountain-head 
Of glory by Urania led ! " 
The " Urania " of Matthew Arnold's poem is less easily defined. 



K. 

PARADISE LOST, vm. 8084. 

In his note on this passage Professor Masson says: "The funda- 
mental notion of the ancient astronomers was that all the motions of 
the heavenly bodies were in circles, the strictly circular motion being 
the most perfect kind.... From very remote antiquity, however, it had 
been perceived that the simple circular motions of eight or even ten 
spheres round the Earth, with whatever variety of rates and times among 
themselves, would not account for all the observed phenomena of the 
heavens, would not account, for example, for the fact that the motion 
of the Sun is faster or slower according to the season (acceleration and 
retardation), or for the fact that the motions of the planets are sometimes 
direct, or in the order of the signs of the Zodiac, and sometimes 
retrograde (progression and regression). To remedy this defect, ' to 
save these appearances,' two devices had been introduced, that of the 
Eccentric and that of the Epicycle. 

4 'Let it be supposed that, while the Earth is the centre of the Primum 
Mobile [i.e. the outermost of the spheres] and consequently of the 
whole mundane system, the inclosed planetary spheres, or at all events 
that of the Sun, need not be strictly concentric, i.e. need not strictly 
have this centre, but may be eccentric, i.e. may revolve round a point 
somewhat to the side of the Earth ; then, as the Earth would sometimes 
be nearer to the moving body, and sometimes farther off, the accelera- 
tion or retardation of the motion would be sufficiently accounted for. 



APPENDIX. 689 

" Again, let it be supposed that the body of a planet is not fixed strictly 
in its cycle, or the circumference of its wheeling sphere, but moves 
flylike in an epicycle, or small circle revolving round a fixed point in 
that wheeling circumference ; then, according as the planet was in that 
part of its epicycle which is beyond, or in that part which is within, its 
cycle, its motion would for the time be progressive, i.e. with its cycle, 
or retrograde, i.e. against its cycle. Actually, by a complicated use of 
these two devices,... the Ptolemaic astronomers had contrived, with a 
tolerable approach to completeness, to account for all the phenomena of 
the solar and planetary motions, but only by such a dizzying intricacy 
of conceived wheels within wheels ('centric and eccentric" 1 ) and wheels 
upon wheels (' cycle and epicycle" 1 } as Milton describes." 

There is a great deal about these theories of the Eccentric and 
Epicycle in Burton's Anatomy of Melancholy, ir. i. in, the chapter 
entitled "a Digression of the Ayre"; see especially pp. 381, 382, 384 
in the ninth edition (1800). Like Milton, he ridicules the too-ingenious 
speculations of astronomers, who, " to solve all appearances and 
objections, have invented new hypotheses, and fabricated new systems 
of the World... The World is tossed in a blanket amongst them, they 
hoyse the Earth up and down like a ball, make it stand and go at their 
pleasures " (pp. 388, 389). 

Compare also Bacon's Essay Of Superstition : 

"It was gravely said of the prelates in the Council of Trent, where 
the doctrine of the Schoolmen bare great sway, that the Schoolmen 
were like astronomers, which did feign eccentrics and epicycles, and 
such engines of orbs, to save tht phenomena 1 , though they knew there 
were no such things ; and, in like manner, that the Schoolmen had 
framed a number of subtle and intricate axioms and theorems to save the 
practice of the Church." See also his Essay Of Wisdom for a Man's 
Self. 

So in The Advancement of Learning, n. 8. 5 : 

"As the same phenomena in astronomy are satisfied by the received 
astronomy of the diurnal motion, and the proper motions of the planets, 
with their eccentrics and epicycles, and likewise by the theory of 
Copernicus, who supposed the earth to move, and the calculations are 
indifferently agreeable to both, so the ordinary face and view of 
experience is many times satisfied by several theories and philosophies ; 
whereas to find the real truth requireth another manner of severity and 
attention" (Clarendon ed., p. 127). 

Sir Thomas Browne uses this astronomical metaphor in charac- 
teristic fashion: 

1 Echoed, perhaps, in Milton's phrase (vm. 82). 
P. L. 44 



690 PARADISE LOST. 

"In philosophy, where truth seems double-faced, there is no man 
more paradoxical than myself: but in divinity I love to keep the road ; 
and, though not in an implicit, yet an humble faith, follow the great 
wheel of the Church, by which I move ; not reserving any proper 
poles, or motion from the epicycle of my own brain" (Religio Medici, 
I. vi.). 

Compare too his Christian Morals, I. xix.: " Hang early plummets 
upon the heels of pride, and let ambition have but an epicycle and 
narrow circuit in thee." 

For eccentric, see the note on v. 623, and compare one of Milton's 
favourite astronomical metaphors in The Reason of Church Government, 
I. i : 

"Yet is it to be conceived that.. .our happiness ["of the blessed in 
paradise "] may orb itself into a thousand vagancies of glory and delight, 
and with a kind of eccentrical equation be, as it were, an invariable 
planet of joy and felicity" (P. W. n. 442). 



L. 

PARADISE LOST, ix. 25-41. 

It was a subject of discussion among Milton's early critics whether 
Paradise Lost should be called " heroic." The question was first raised 
by Dryden in the Discourse on Satire (1693) prefixed to his translation 
of Juvenal, thus : 

"As for Mr Milton, whom we all admire with so much justice, his 
subject is not that of an heroic poem, properly so called. His design 
is the losing of our happiness ; his event [i.e. end, termination] is not 
prosperous, like that of all other epic works ; his heavenly machines are 
many, and his human persons are but two." And, " besides questioning 
whether * Paradise Lost ' was an heroic poem, Dryden had argued [in the 
preface to Vergil that the devil was the hero and not Adam 1 ." 

Addison said : " I shall waive the discussion of that point, which was 
started some years since, whether Milton's ' Paradise Lost ' may be 
called an heroic poem. Those who will not give it that title may call it 
(if they please) a divine poem." Addison held that an heroic poem 
should not end unhappily and that therefore Paradise Lost, to this 
extent, forfeits the title " heroic " ; but he argued that the defect was 
inherent in the subject, and that Milton showed exquisite judgment and 
invention in remedying it (see the note on XI. 35658). 

1 C. H. Firth, Johnson's Lift of Milton, p. 135. Several of the passages in this 
section are taken from his full note. 



APPENDIX. 691 

Johnson dealt with the objection more summarily : 
"The questions, whether the action of the poem be strictly one, 
whether the poem can be properly termed heroic, and who is the hero, 
are raised by such readers as draw their principles of judgment rather 
from books than from reason. Milton, though he entitled ' Paradise Lost ' 
only a ' poem,' yet calls it himself ' heroic song.' Dryden petulantly and 
indecently denies the heroism of Adam, because he was overcome ; but 
there is no reason why the hero should not be unfortunate, except 
established practice, since success and virtue do not go necessarily 
together. Cato is the hero of Lucan ; but Lucan's authority will not be 
suffered by Quintilian to decide. However, if success be necessary, 
Adam's deceiver was at last crushed ; Adarri was restored to his Maker's 
favour, and therefore may securely resume his human rank." 

The ordinary conception of an " heroical " poem would have been 
fulfilled more obviously, at least, if Milton had carried out his design of 
a poem on King Arthur 1 or King Alfred 3 . 



M. 
PARADISE LOST, x. 658-62. 

Dr Masson illustrates the astrological terms in these lines by a passage 
translated from "an old Latin catechism or text-book of Astronomy 
(Bebelius, De Sphara, 1582) "; it runs as follows: 

" What are the aspects of planets ? They are such arrangements and 
distances of the planets as allow them to intercommunicate their 
influence. How many species of aspects are there? Five Conjunction, 
Sextile, Square, Trine, and Diametral or Opposition. What is the 
first? The first kind of aspects, called Conjunction, is when two stars 
or planets are conjoined and as it were connected in one line ; by the 
Greeks it is called Synod. What is the Sextile aspect? When two 
planets or stars are distant from each other a sixth part of the Zodiac, 
viz. two signs or 60. What is the Square aspect (quadratus aspechis) ? 
When two stars look at each other at an interval of three signs, making 
a quadrant or 90. What is Trine (Trigonus] aspect? When the 
distance of the stars measures a third of the circle, that is 120 or four 
signs. What is the Diametral aspect ? It is the opposite configuration 

1 See Introduction. 

2 Cf. the Cambridge MSS. : " A Heroicall Poem may be founded somewhere in 
Alfreds reigne." Curiously enough, of all the subjects enumerated in the MSS., this 
is the only one to which he applies the word " heroical." 

442 



692 PARADISE LOST. 

of two luminaries, which are distant from each other 180 or half a 
circle.... 

" How are the aspects divided ? Into happy and unhappy. Which 
are the happy and prosperous aspects? The prosperous and benign are 
the Trine 1 and Sextile. Why are they called happy ? Because the rays 
of the planets, falling obliquely and mutually yielding, infuse and 
communicate to inferior bodies gentler and less violent influences. What 
are the unhappy aspects? The unhappy or malignant are Conjunction'-, 
Square, and Opposition 3 . Why are they called malignant? Because 
the planets, meeting each other with their rays, mutually collide, and 
neither can yield to the other on account of the directness of their onset. 
Therefore they exercise greater force in stimulating and varying seasons, 
and in mixing the temperaments of animals and the qualities of the air. 
Whence is this variety of effects known? The effect and variety of 
configuration were first observed in the case of the Moon, and afterwards 
transferred to the other planets by artists (artifices} who, by great 
sharpness of intelligence, and more attentive observation, endeavoured 
to find out and display the causes of events from the very nature of the 
heavenly motions and the species of the aspects." Dr Masson adds, 
"Milton, it will be noted, names all the aspects, giving Conjunction its 
Greek name of Synod." Milton had used very similar astrological 
language in one of his pamphlets on divorce (Tetrachordon): 

"For nature hath her zodiac also, keeps her great annual circuit 
over human things, as truly as the sun and planets in the firmament ; 
hath her anomalies, hath her obliquities in ascensions and declinations, 
accesses and recesses, as blamelessly as they in heaven. And sitting in 
her planetary orb with two reins in each hand, one strait, the other 
loose, tempers the course of minds as well as bodies to several con- 
junctions and oppositions, friendly or unfriendly aspects, consenting 
oftest with reason, but never contrary" (P. W. in. 403). 

l Cf. Dryden, Annus Mirabilis, st. 292 : 

"Now frequent trines the happier lights among, 

And high-raised Jove from his dark prison freed, 
Those weights took off that on his planet hung, 

Will gloriously the new-laid work succeed" (i.e. make to succeed) 
In his note (Clarendon ed., p. 259) Mr Christie gives other illustrations from Dryden 
(who "was learned in astrology and a firm believer"), e.g. his Ode to the Memory 
of Mrs Ann Killegrew 

" For sure the milder planets did combine 
On thy auspicious horoscope to shine 
And even the most malicious were in trine." 

8 Cf. 2 Henry IV. . 4. 286, 287. Selden in his Table~Talk has a section (xxvi.) 
on the "Great Conjunction" (of Saturn and Jupiter). 

a Cf. Richard III. iv. 4. 215, " Lo, at their births good stars were opposite," and 
402, " Be opposite all planets of good luck." 



GLOSSARY. 



Milton's diction is essentially Elizabethan: the diction of the 
Authorised Version (1611) of the Bible and of Shakespeare. Paradise 
Lost, therefore, though published in 1667, is best illustrated from the 
works of the generation contemporary with Shakespeare. Hence many 
of the illustrations in the Glossary and Notes are taken from the writers 
who may collectively and conveniently be described as Elizabethan. 

A marked feature of Milton's diction, as of his style, is his classical 
bias. He employs many words in their classical sense, just as he 
employs many classical idioms and figures of speech. This classicism 
of diction is still more conspicuous in his prose, in which he introduces 
numbers of long, sonorous words derived from the Latin. Sometimes 
he invents such words. Paradise Lost contains innumerable examples 
of his classical diction. 

Another interesting feature is his partiality for Italianised forms. 
This is more conspicuous in his verse, perhaps because he felt so 
strongly, and wished his readers to be reminded of, the spell and 
fascination of the great Italian epics. By his own statement, he had 
studied Italian much before he went to Italy. His letters and prose- 
works reveal his love of it (I do not remember any interesting reference 
in his works to French literature) ; and several short poems testify to 
his very considerable mastery of the language. Instances of his leaning 
towards Italian are ammiral, harald, Soldan, sovran ; sdein (iv. 50), 
serenate (iv. 769) ; azuru, Ital. azzurrino (Comus, 893). 

Abassin, iv. 280, ' Abyssinian.' Abyssinia is from Arabic Habcsch, 
* mixture, confusion,' a name given to the country by the Arabs on 
account of the mixed character of its inhabitants. This Arabic word 
was Latinised by the Portuguese as Abassia and Abasstnos, whence the 
present form. 

abide, iv. 87; cf. Julius Ceesar, in. 2. 119, "If it be found so, 
some will dear abide it," i.e. suffer for it. This sense is given in the 



694 PARADISE LOST. 

old Dictionaries^ such as Cotgrave's (161 1), and Minsheu's Guide into the 
Tongues (1625). The metaphor is 'to await the consequences of a deed 
and so, in the end, to pay for it.' Probably abide in this sense has been 
influenced by, though etymologically quite distinct from, aby, * to ex- 
piate, pay for' = A.S. intensive prefix d + bycgan, 'to buy.' 

abject, I. 312, 'cast down,' the literal sense of Lat. abjectus, the 
past participle of abjicere, ' to cast away or down.' In Tindale's New 
Testament (1534), 2 Cor. vii. 6 is rendered "He that comfortith the 
abjecte" = " those that are cast down" in the Authorised Version. 
For the ordinary figurative use cf. ix. 572. 

abuse, i. 479, ' to deceive, delude ' ; cf. Fr. abuser (Lat. abuti, ' to 
misuse'). This is a common Elizabethan use; cf. Cymbeline, ill. 4. 
123, King Lear, IV. i. 24. 

abyss, i. 21, 658; Lat. abyssus, from Gk. aj3u<ro-os, 'bottomless* 
d-, ' not ' + fiv<rff6t, 'bottom, depth.' Shakespeare always uses the older 
form abysm, from Fr. abisme; cf. The Tempest, I. 2. 50, "In the dark 
backward and abysm of time." 

admire, I. 690, n. 677, ' to wonder,' the literal sense of Lat. admirari. 
Cf. admiration^ 'wonder,' III. 271, and in Hamlet, in. 2. 339, "your 
behaviour hath struck her into amazement and admiration"; and 
admirable ' to be wondered at,' in A Midsummer- Nighfs Dream, v. 27. 

adust, xi. 635, ' dried, scorched ' ; the p.p. of the verb adttre, Lat. 
adttrere'i cf. VI. 514. We also find a noun, adustion. "It was a tall 
figure, of a philosophic, serious, adust look," A Sentimental Journey 
("The Mystery"). 

advise, n. 376, ' to consider ' ; often used reflexively in this sense, like 
Fr. s'aviser, 'to consider.' Cf. i Chronicles xxi. 12, "advise thyself 
what word I shall bring again to him that sent me " (Revised Version 
"consider"). 

alarmed, iv. 985; Fr. aon=Ital. a' arme, 'to arms!' (Lat. ad 
ilia arma) ; so that properly an alarm was a summons to take up arms, 
i.e. prepare for battle. Here alarmed means that Satan was prepared 
for the fight not that he was afraid. Dryden (y. in. 313, 314) 
has the phrase take alarm (vi. 549) : 

"Misenus sounds a charge: we take th' alarm, 
And our strong hands with swords and bucklers arm." 

alchymy, n. 517, ' metal ' ; properly alchemy, from Arabic alkimia : 
#='the' (Arabic article), + ktmid, a corruption of x^ a use d in late Gk. 
for the chemical transmutation of metals. Probably x 1 ?"'* was the Gk. 
form of the native name of Egypt ( = ' the land of Khem '), and meant 
' the Egyptian art.' Later, through confusion with te(.v, ' to pour' (cf. 
s, ' sap, juice '), there arose a form xvxela : whence in E. the old 



GLOSSARY. 695 

spellings 'alchymy,' 'alchmie,' and 'chemist* (short for 'alchemist'). 
From meaning the art of amalgamating metals ' alchemy ' came to be 
used of the amalgam or metallic composition produced by the process. 
A certain amalgam, like gold, was called 'alchemy gold' or 'alchemy'; 
cf. Fletcher, Purple Island, VII. 39, " Such were his arms, false gold, 
true alchymie." This mixed metal, in which brass was the chief 
constituent, was much employed for trumpets (n. 517). 

alley, iv. 626, 'a garden-walk,' especially one "with branches 
overgrown" (iv. 617). Cf. Much Ado About Nothing, I. 2. TO, "a 
thick-pleached alley," i.e. thickly interwoven overhead ; and Tennyson, 
Ode to Memory, 5 : 

"Or a garden bower'd close 

With plaited alleys of the trailing rose." 
O. Fr. alee, Fr. allte. 

Alp, n. 620 ; formerly used, like Alpes in late Latin poets, of any 
high (especially snow-capped) mountain. Cf. S. A. 628, "Nor breath 
of vernal air from snowy Alp"; and Hakluyt's Voyages, I. 112, 
" Certaine Alpes or Mountaines directly Southward." So the Italians 
use alpestro-^ steep, alpine' ; cf. the Inferno, XII. 3. A Celtic word ; 
cf. Gaelic alp, 'a high mountain.' 

amarant, in. 352; Gk. dxdjavros, 'unfading' the word used in 
i Peter v. 4 of the "crown of glory that fadeth not away." The flower 
typifies immortality. M. writes the correct form ; the more usual 
' amaranth ' is due to confusion with Gk. &vQos, ' a flower.' 

amain; an intensive word, emphasising the sense of the verb. 
O. E. magn = ' power '; from the root whence ^705, magnus. 

ambrosial ; used by M. of that which delights the sense of smell 
(in. 135, IX. 852) or taste. Strictly, auppoaia., from a;*9p<50-ios ( a 
lengthened form of d^tSporos, ' immortal'), meant the food of the gods. 

amerce, I. 609, literally 'to punish'; cf. Romeo and Juliet, in. i. 
195, "But I'll amerce you with so strong ay?*." Fr. amercier, ' to fine,' 
which was derived from the O. Fr. phrase estre a merci ^Q be in the 
mercy of any one as to the amount of a fine (Lat. merx) which he 
could impose.' Legally an Amerciament differed from a fine thus : 
"Fines... are punishments certain, which grow expressly from some 
Statute; and Amerciaments are arbitrarily imposed by Assessors" 
(Blount, Glossographia, 1656). Fr. merci, whence E. mercy, is connected 
with merx ( = ' a fine ' in Late Latin), and not with misericordia. 

amiable, iv. 250, vni. 484, ix. 899, 'lovely, pleasing'; cf. Psalm 
Ixxxiv. i, "How amiable are thy dwellings" (Prayer- Book}. Lat. 
amicabilis, 'friendly.' 

ammiral, i. 294. The chief vessel of a fleet was called the 'admiral ' 



696 PARADISE LOST. 

because it carried the admiral or chief officer. Cf. Hakluyt, I. 401, " the 

sayd William met with sixe ships and tooke of them the Admirall." 

The word was indeed quite common in the i6th century works of 
travel; cf. Webb's Travels, 1590: "her Maijesties shippe called the 
Willoughby was our Admirall, and the Harry appertayning to the 
company of the Merchants, was our Vice-admirall, Maister William 
Burrow then being our Captaine and maister" (Arber's ed., p. 19). 
In the form ammiral M. imitates Ital. ammiraglia, which Florio (1598) 
renders by "an admirall or chief ship." Properly admiral means 
'ruler, commander,' being derived from Arabic Amir, 'ruler' (cf. 
Ameer of Afghanistan and Emir) ; and formerly the full phrase 
" admiral of the sea " was used. The d in admiral (older form amyrel) 
arose through confusion with Lat. admirabilis and admirable. 

amphisbsena, X. 524 ; Gk. dfjufilffpcui'a, ' a kind of serpent that can 
go either forwards or backwards ' (Gk. a.fji.^1, ' on both sides ' +ftaiveiv, 
'to go '). See the Agamemnon 1733. It was supposed to have a head 
at either end of its body: hence the allusion in Tennyson's Queen 
Mary, HI. 4 : 

" For heretic and traitor are all one ; 
Two vipers of one breed an amphisbsena, 
Each end a sting." 
Dante has the word in the Serpent-passage in the Inferno, xxiv. 87. 

annoy ; derived through O. Fr. anoi, ' vexation,' from Lat. in odio, 
used in the phrase in odio est mihi, 'it is odious, to me.' In VI. 369 
it has the old Shakespearian sense 'to hurt, harm.' Cognate with 
' noisome '= 'unpleasant,' especially of smell, which practically is short 
for ' anoisome ' ; cf. IX. 946. 

apparent, IV. 608, x. 1 12 = ' visible, manifest ' (Lat. apparent) ; as in 
P. A". II. 397. Cf. Richard III. in. 5. 30, "apparent open guilt," 
and King John, iv. 2. 93, "apparent foul play." 

apply* IV. 264 ; commonly explained ' to practise, engage in ' (cf. the 
abbreviated form ply) ; for this use, formerly not uncommon, cf. Fuller's 
Worthies, " That he might the more effectually apply his private devo- 
tions," Works (ed. 1840), HI. 402. I believe, however, that the sense 
intended by M. is 'add,' and that the word was so interpreted by 
Collins and Thomson. Cf. The Passions, 49, 50 : 
"Dejected Pity at his side 

Her soul-subduing voice applied"; 
and The Seasons (Spring) : 

"the woodlands round 
Applied their quire." 
'To add' may come from the general sense of apply- 'to bring to 



GLOSSARY. 697 

bear upon ' ; or M. may simply have imitated the rare use of Latin 
applicare = * to add.' 

approve, ix. 367, 1140, 'to show' by bringing a thing to the test 
(Lat. ad, 'to'+proba, 'a test'). Cf. 2 Corinthians vii. u, "In all 
things ye have approved yourselves to be clear in this matter." 

areed, or aread, iv. 962, 'to advise'; A.S. d-rSdan = a-, intensive 
prefix, --rddan , 'to advise.' Cf. rede (or read], 'counsel,' as in Hamlet, 
* 3- 5 J > "recks not his own rede." But the commoner meanings of 
areed were ' to divine, conjecture ' (cf. the cognate Germ, errathen, 
'to guess'); and 'to declare, tell,' as often in Spenser; cf. The Faerie 
Queene, I. 9. iS, II. 3. 14. 

asphodel, ix. 1040 ; Gk. d<r0<53eos, a kind of lily, supposed to 
flourish especially in the Elysian fields ; cf. Comus, 838. Daffodil is a 
curious corruption of cur#63eXoj through Low Lat. affodilhis. 

assay, I. 619, in. 90, x. 567, 865, 'to try, attempt'; M. always 
uses this form, from O. Fr. assai, a variant of O. Fr. essai, whence 
comes our commoner form essay. Lat. exagium^ Gk. et-dyiov, 'a 
weighing, trial of weight.' Now assay is commonly used of the testing 
of metals. 

astonish, I. 266, vi. 838 ; formed from the older verb astony-O. Fr. 
estonner, modern Fr. ttonner, from Lat. extonare, 'to thunder.' The 
original notion of astony (see ix. 890), astonish, and astound (i. 281) 
was ' to stupefy, strike senseless, as with a thunderbolt.' Cf. the 
Argument to bk. I., line 12, and Milton's History of Britain, 
"astonished and struck with superstition as with a planet." See The 
Faerie Queene, iv. 8. 43. 

ay me, I v. 86, ' alas ' ; cf. Lycidas, 56, ' ' Ay me ! I fondly dream ! " 
It is frequent in Shakespeare. Cotgrave (1611) has, "Oh: aye me; 
an interjection expressing sense of paine, or of smart." O. Fr. aymi, 
'alas, for me' ; cf. Ital. ahimt, Gk. oftot. 

baleful, I. 56, u. 576, 'full of sorrow, unhappy'; commonly 
'full of harm' cf. Comus, 255, "baleful drugs." A.S. * = 'evil, 
sorrow.' 

toarricado, vin. 241 , ' to fortify.' The noun barricade is from Spanish 
barricada, literally 'a rampart formed by barrels' (Span. barrica = 
' barrel '), and so ' any rampart, fortification.' Cf. AWs Well that Ends 
Well, I. i. 124; and Milton's treatise Of Reformation in England, I. : 
"the table of communion, now become a table of separation, stands 
like an exalted platform upon the brow of the quire, fortified with 
bulwark and barricade, to keep off the profane touch of the laics" 
(P. W. u. 378). 

bases, ix. 36. Cf. The Faerie Quecne, v. 5. 20 : 



698 PARADISE LOST. 

"she made him to be dight 
In womans weedes, that is to manhood shame, 
And put before his lap a napron white, 
Instead of Curiets [i.e. cuirasses] and bases fit for fight." 
Peele in his Polyhymnia, 1590 (a description of a tournament), speaks 
of a knight clad " In armour gilt and bases full of cost." 

beest, i. 84. The verb be, from A.S. beon (the infinitive), was 
conjugated in the pres. tense indicative as late as Milton's time, 
especially in the 2nd pers. sing, with if. M. indeed does not use " if 
thou beest " elsewhere, but the idiom is frequent in Shakespeare ; 
cf. The Tempest, m. 2. 137, "if thou beest a man," and v. 134, "if 
thou be'st Prosper o." 

Behemoth, vn. 471. " This word is the Heb. plural of behtmah, and 
signifies 'beasts,' but in Job xl. 15 24 some large animal, e.g. the 
hippopotamus, is evidently intended" (Cambridge Companion to the 
Bible). M. meant the elephant. 

bicker, vi. 766; used of gleaming, darting light. Cf. Tennyson, 
Geraint and Enid : 

"turning round she saw 
Dust and the points of lances bicker in it"; 

and The Princess, v. The word is also used of rippling water or a quick- 
flowing brook, as in the first stanza of Tennyson's The Brook. Thomson 
in The Castle of Indolence, I. 3, speaks of glittering streamlets that 
"bickered through the sunny glade." 

blanc, x. 656, ' pale,' from the literal sense 'white,' Fr. blanc. For 
the form blanc (i.e. blank), obsolete as an adjective, cf. the noun blanc, 
' white paint.' 

bland, v. 5 ; used poetically of that which is "soft, mild, pleasing 
to the senses ; gentle, genial, balmy, soothing." 

blow, v. 22, 'to bloom, flower'; cf. Lycidas, 48, "When first the 
white-thorn blows." Minsheu has, "To blow as a flower, or to open 
as a mA...bluhen, fleurir" Blow, bloom, blossom are cognate, and 
akin to Lat. flos and its derivatives, flower, flourish, etc. 

boon, iv. 242, 'gracious, bounteous'; a poetical use. Cf. Thomson, 
Liberty, II., "All that boon Nature could luxuriant pour" ; and The Castle 
of Indolence, I. 57: 

"Of the fine stores he nothing would impart, 

Which or boon Nature gave, or nature-painting art." 
So in Collins's Ode The Manners (ehd) : 

"O Nature boon, from whom proceed 

Each forceful thought, each prompted deed." 
Now only in the phrase " boon companion." Fr. ban (Lat. bonus). 



GLOSSARY. 699 

brinded, vu. 466, 'striped, streaked'; cf. Comus, 443, "thebrinded 
lioness." An older form than brindled, it means literally 'marked as 
with a brand,' and generally indicates stripes of dark colour on the 
tawny coat of an animal. See Macbeth, iv. i. I, "Thrice the brinded 
cat hath mew'd." 

brown, ix. 1088, 'dark'; in poetry a constant epithet of shade and 
twilight. Cf.  Penseroso, 134, "shadows brown"; P. R. n. 293, 
"alleys brown," i.e. shady paths; and imbrown in iv. 246. Imitated 
from the similar use of bruno and imbrnnire by Italian poets. Thus in 
his 2nd Ital. Sonnet M. has " al imbrunir di sera," with which editors 
compare Petrarch, Canzoni, iv. 3, and Tasso, Gerusalemme Liberata, 
v. 76. So in the Inferno, n. i, where Vaer bruno refers to twilight. 

bull, in. 492; a papal edict, of an important character: "so 
named from the bulla (or round leaden seal), which is attached to the 
document... and gives authenticity to it" (Addis and Arnold, Catholic 
Diet.}. 

bullion, i. 704; Fr. bouillon, Lat. bullio, * a mass of metal,' from 
bullire, * to boil.' Bullion is connected with Lat. bulla, ' a seal,' in 
so far as bulla itself is from bullire. 

buxom, n. 842, V. 270, 'yielding'; from A.S. btigan, 'to bend'; 
cf. Germ, beugsam, ' easily bent, pliant.' Originally buxom meant 
'obedient'; cf. the Glosse to Spenser's The Shepheards Calender, 
September, " Bitxome and bent, meeke and obedient." Then came 
the sense 'yielding, pliant'; cf. Fairfax, Tasso, XV. 12, "with strong 
oars... brush the buxom wave." 

Can, xi. 388. Kaan, or Khan, was the title of the supreme ruler of 
China during the reigns of the Mongol Emperors descended from Ching- 
hiz, or Genghis, Khan (the name corrupted into Cambuscan see note 
on  Pen. no). In Elizabethan writers Kaan often appears as Cham; 
cf. Much Ado About Nothing, II. i. 274 77, "will... fetch you a hair 
off the great Cham's beard." Frequently the Cham is spoken of as 
the ruler of the district of Central Asia vaguely called Tartary. Cf. 
Giles Fletcher's Of the Russe Common Wealth, 1591, "The greatest 
and mightiest of them (the Tartars) is the Chrim Tartar (whom some 
call the Great Cham] that lieth South, and Southeastward from Russia." 
Hexham's edition, too, of Mercator^s Atlas (1636) describes Tartary as 
"the Empire of the Grand Cham." Very little was then known about 
Central Asia. 

caravan, vn. 428. Properly (i) a company of merchants or pil- 
grims travelling together, as a protection against robbers, in the East. 
Hence (2) any ' company, troop ' ; as here and in P. R. i. 323. Then 
(3) 'a covered waggon'; cf. the abbreviation van. Persian karwan, 
' escort.' 



700 PARADISE LOST. 

career, I. 766; a word specially associated with tournaments, 
signifying 'a short gallop at high speed.' Cf. the Animadversions, 
"all this careering with spear in rest" (P. W. III. 90). Fr. cariere, 
Lat. carraria (i.e. via), 'a road for carriages.' 

causey, x. 415, 'a raised way'; now obsolete except in dialects. 
Cf., however, Proverbs xv. 19, "the way of the righteous is made 
plain," where the margin has "raised up as a causey." In i Chronicles 
xxvi. 16 the Bible of 1611 had "by the causey of the going up," 
afterwards changed to causeway ; the latter is a compound of the 
old world causey + way. A causey implies a paved road, such as 
a paved track across a moor or boggy land, or the Roman paved 
roads in Northumberland ; hence sometimes used colloquially of the 
pavement or side- walk contrasted with the road proper. From Late 
Lat. calciata (i.e. calciata via), literally ' a way made firm by treading 
with the heel' (calx). 

champain, iv. 134, 'open, flat'; applied to unenclosed land, downs, 
large fields ; cf. Lucrece, 1247, *' a goodly champaign plain." Minsheu's 
Dictionary entitled The Guide into the Tongues (1625) has: "champion, 
or plaine ground." The Dialect Diet, aptly quotes the title of Tusser's 
Husbandry ( 1 580) : " Five hundred pointes of good Husbandrie, as well 
for the Champion, or open countrie, as also for the woodland." Com- 
monly a noun (vi. 2); cf. Deut. xi. 30, "the Canaanites, which dwell 
in the champaign over against Gilgal." O. Fr. champaigne, modern Fr. 
campagne, Ital. campagna, Lat. campania from campus. 

charity, in. 216, iv. 756, xn. 584; then often used = Move, 
benevolence. 1 Cf. i Cor. xiii., where the Revised Version of the 
Bible substitutes love for charity throughout, the Greek being dydirrj 
(Vulgate caritas). In the three places where M. uses the word the 
meaning is 'love.' Cf. Wordsworth, The Excursion, ix. 238, "The 
charities that soothe, and heal, and bless"; and Tennyson, The 
Princess, vil., "fair charities." Lat. carus, 'dear.' 

charm, iv. 642, 65 1, ' song.' M. may have supposed it to be derived 
from Lat. carmen, ' song,' but really charm as used of the song of birds is 
of Anglo-Saxon origin. It is a variant form of Middle E. cherme or chirm 
= A.S. firm. This old word (allied to chirp and the Germ, jammern) 
meant a blended singing or noise of many children, birds or bees; cf. 
Palsgrave (1530), "what a cherme these byrdes [birds] make, comme ces 
oyseaux jargonnent." A Shropshire rustic might still say, "what charm 
them childern bin makin i' the school" (i.e. what a confused noise). Cf. 
also the dialect-expression 'to charm or cherm bees,' i.e. to follow a 
swarm of bees, beating a tea-tray, or anything similar, to make them 
settle. The noisy chatter of a flock of starlings is exactly a charm or 
cherm. Tennyson uses charm accurately ; cf. The Progress of Spring, 



GLOSSARY. 701 

IV., "I hear a charm of song thro' all the land." Probably cherme or 
chirm would never have got this variant form charm but for the in- 
fluence of Lat. carmen. 

Cherubim; the correct form = Heb. Kherubhim, the plural of 
Khtrubh ; adopted in the Revised Version of the Bible. The oldest 
forms in English, as still in French, were Cherubin, sing., and Ghent- 
bins, plural. Cf. Coverdale, "Thou God of Israel, which dwellest upon 
Cherubin," Isaiah xxxvii. 16 ; and Wyclif, "Two Goldun Cherubyns," 
Exodus xxv. 18. Later, as in the Bible of 1611, Cherub, sing., and 
Cherubims, plural, were used, as being closer to the Hebrew. M. wrote 
Cherube for singular (a still nearer approach in sound than ' Cherub ' to 
the u of the Heb. Kheriibh}, and the true plural Chenibim in his 
poetry; but Cherubims occurs in Of Reformation in England, II. 
(P. W. n. 406). Kherubh is said to come from the Babylonian word 
for the figure of the winged bull which stood at the door of a house to 
keep off evil spirits. The Jews probably owed it to the Phoenicians. 

combustion, I. 46; properly 'conflagration,' from Lat. comburere, 
to burn up'; cf. Selden's Table-Talk'. "After Luther had made a 
combustion in Germany about religion" (Reynold's ed., p. 34). Hence 
metaphorically 'utter confusion,' or 'destruction,' as here. Cf. vi. -225, 
and Macbeth, n. 3. 63. In M. always a very strong word ; cf. Of Refor- 
mation in England, n., " to threaten uproar and combustion, and shake 
the brand of civil discord," P. W. n. 417. 

concoct, v. 412 ; Lat. concoquere, 'to boil together, reduce by heat' : 
especially, 'to reduce into a state of nourishment,' i.e. digest. Cf. M. 
in On Education, " The like also would not be inexpedient after meat, 
to assist and cherish nature in her first concoction," P. W. in. 476. 

conjured, n. 693, 'banded (literally 'sworn') together in a con- 
spiracy ' ; Lat. conjuratus. Cf. Surrey's translation (1557) of sEneid n., 
"They bind themselves with the conjured bands," and The Faerie 
Queene, v. 10. 26. 

connive, x. 624; Lat. connivere, 'to close the eyes, wink,' hence 
figuratively ' to shut one's eyes to a fault.' Now it always has the bad 
sense of 'winking at something wrong '; but in Elizabethan E. it also had 
the good sense ' to tolerate, be long-suffering.' Cf. S. A. 465 67: 

" He [the Almighty] 

Will not connive, or linger, thus provoked, 
But will arise and his great name assert." 

In Of Reformation in England, II., M. praises "the constancy of our 
nobility and commons of England,... whose calm and temperate con- 
nivance could sit still and smile out the stormy bluster,..," P. IV. 
II. 406. 



702 PARADISE LOST. 

couch, ii. 536, 'to fix the spear in the rest' (Fr. coucher). The 
' rest ' was " a strong part of the armour at the breast, against which they 
placed the butt of the spear to give more force to the charge" (Keight- 
ley). Cf. i Henry VL ill. 2. 134, 1< A braver soldier never couched 
lance." 

cresset, 1.728; a vessel of iron to hold some burning substance 
(e.g. grease, oil, tarred rope) and serve as a lantern or beacon ; usually 
mounted on the top of a pole, or hung from a roof; cf. Scott, Mann ion, 
" A cresset in an iron chain." It was an archaic word even in Milton's 
time; cf. Minsheu (1625) : "a Cresset, an old word used for a Lanterne, 
or burning Beacon." Cotgrave's Dictionary (ed. 1652) adds a curious 
little detail: "Falot. A Cresset light (such as they use in Play-houses)." 
Fr. cresset or crasset, 'a cup for holding grease.' 

cry, II. 654, 'a pack'; cf. Coriolanus, in. 3. 120, "You common 
cry of curs ! " The sense comes from the hounds' cry or notes. 

damasked, iv. 334. The noun damask meant properly a rich kind 
of silk ornamented with raised figures, originally manufactured at 
Damascus. By metaphor, the word came to imply ' variegation ' as 
here.- Cf. As You Like It, III. 5. 123, and Shakespeare, Sonnet 130, 
" I have seen roses damask'd, red and white." 

darkling, in. 39, ' in the dark ' ; cf. A Midsummer- Nigh? s Dream, 
II. 2. 86, "O, wilt thou darkling leave me? do not so," and King Lear, 
. 4. 237. It is a substantival adverb, in which -ling or -long is a relic of 
a dative case-ending; cf. headlong, sidelong (Middle E. hedling, sideling). 
In Scotch the form is lins; cf. hafflins*iai,' e.g. in Burns, Cotter's 
Saturday Night, 62, "While Jenny hafflins is afraid to speak." 

decent, in. 644, 'comely' ; used by M. only here and in  Penseroso, 
36, in each place = Lat. decent, 'comely, graceful.' Cf. Pope, Elegy to 
the Memory of an Unfortunate Lady, 51, 52 : 

" By foreign hands thy dying eyes were closed, 

By foreign hands thy decent limbs composed." 
Cf. decencies^ graceful acts or words' in vin. 601. 

descant, iv. 603 ; strictly, a musical term for variations added to a 
"plain song," i.e. a melody in its simplest form. Cf. Jeremy Taylor, 
"after the angel had told his message in plain song, the whole chorus 
joined in descant." M., whose use of musical terms is very accurate, 
employs descant here to signify the varied notes of the nightingale. Cf. 
Isaac Walton's description " the clear airs, the sweet descants, the 
natural rising and falling, the doubling and redoubling of her voice" 
(i.e. the nightingale's), Complete Angler, I. i. So Spenser says of 
the thrush, "the Mavis descant playes," Epithalamium, 81. Contrast 
"the plain-song cuckoo" in A Midsummer- Night's Dream, in. i. 134, 



GLOSSARY. 703 

said in allusion to the bird's simple, monotonous note. In S. A. 1228 
descant has a figurative sense. 

determine. The senses 'to put an end to, bring to an end,' and 
' to come to an end, cease to exist to be in force, ' are common in 
Elizabethan writers, but now chiefly confined to legal documents. 
Cf. 2 Henry IV. iv. 5. 82, Coriolanus, ill. 3. 43. The idea of 'end' 
(Lat. terminus) is conspicuous in n. 330, vi. 318, xi. 227. 

dint, n. 813, 'a blow,' its original sense; also used of the dent 
(another form of dint) or impression left by a blow ; cf. Shakespeare, 
Antony and Cleopatra, n. 6. 39, "targes undinted," i.e. shields not 
marked by blows. Dint is still a north -country word for 'a blow, 
shock.' 

disastrous, i. 597, ' boding misfortune.' Disaster (Lat. dis + astrutn, 
'a star') is one of the words belonging to astrology. Cf. Minsheu : 
" disastre, misfortune... proprie incommodum aliquod ex influentijs 
A stroru m" Cf . ' i 11 - s t ar red . ' 

divan, x. 457, 'a council, 'properly the council of the Sultan or some 
Oriental sovereign or governor ; Arabic dlwdn, ' a council, tribunal.' 
Fr. douane, ' a custom-house, ' comes from diwdn. 

dole, iv. 894, 'sorrow, pain ' ; O. Fr. doel, Fr. deuil Late Lat. dolium, 
from the stem of dolere, 'to grieve.' Cf. Hamlet, I. 2. 13, "In equal 
scale weighing delight and dole.'''' 

draff, x. 630, ' refuse food,' especially food given to swine. Cf. 
Cotgrave's French Dictionary (1611), " Mangeaille pour les porceaux : 
Swillings, washings, draffe." Samson was given " the draff of servile 
food," S. A. 574. Used figuratively; cf. Milton's Doctrine and Dis- 
cipline of Divorce, "the brood of Belial, the draff of men," P. W. 
in. 173. 'As bad as draff ' = ' utterly worthless' is a common 
Yorkshire phrase. Cognate with drab, ' an untidy woman.' 

element, 11. 490, 'sky,' a common Elizabethan use; cf. Henry V. 
IV. i. 105, 107, " the king is but a man, as I am : the element shows to 
him as it doth to me." So in King Lear, III. i. 4. 

elixir, in. 607 = Arabic el iksir, the philosopher's stone; see note 
on in. 601, and cf. Chaucer, Canterbury Tales, 16331 : "the philosophers 
ston j Elixir cleped." That was the strict sense of elixir; but it was 
also variously used by alchemists of (i) a liquid by which metals might 
be transmuted into gold, (2) a tincture of gold (auruni polabile}, which 
would prolong life ; hence (3) a life-giving cordial, or substance, or 
force. Arabic el iksir is really a Greek word (ir)pov or ^piov), and 
means 'the dry-principle.' 

emblem, iv. 703, ' inlaid or mosaic work,' i.e. ornamentation inserted 
into the surface of an object, e.g. a floor (as here) or a table. Gk. fy- 



704 PARADISE LOST. 

prj}j.a, 'a thing put in, an ornament.' Now commonly= 'an allegorical 
representation of, a symbol.' 

empyreal; literally 'fiery, formed of fire,' i. 117, n. 430. But 
M. uses it generally in the sense 'heavenly,' i.e. as the adj. from 
empyrean = ' heaven.' Lat. empyraus, Gk. fyiTrfyatos, ' in the fire (irvp), 
fiery hot, burning.' M. always accents the adj. empyreal ', but the 
noun empyrtan (n. 771). 

engine, I. 750; in its original sense 'contrivance,' i.e. something 
made with ingenuity (Lat. ingenium). Later, ' an implement, instru- 
ment,' especially of war; so in II. 923, where it may mean 'cannon,' 
as in vi. 484, 518. Cf. Othello, in. 3. 355, "you mortal engines" 
(i.e. cannon). 

enormous, I. 511, v. 297, 'monstrous, out of all measure,' rule the 
literal sense of Lat. enormis. Cf. Of Reformation in England, I., 
"misshapen and enormous prelatism," P. IV. II. 373. Blount, Glosso- 
graphia, has, "Enormity, want of measure, or rule, unevenness, 
hugeness." 

essence ; properly ' being, existence ' (Lat. essentia, from esse ; cf. 
Gk. oviria) ; hence ' something that is an existence, entity especially 
something spiritual, a heavenly, immaterial being, 1 like the angels 
(i. 138). Cf. Sir Thomas Browne, "those noble essences in heaven 
bear a friendly regard unto their fellow-natures on earth " (Religio 
Medici, I. xxxi.). In the singular M. always uses essence to mean 
'constituent substance' (i. 425, II. 215, IX. 166). 

exercise, n. 89 ; in the sense of Lat. exercere, *to harass, torment'; 
cf. Vergil, sEneid V. 725, nale. ..Iliads exercite fatis. So in Ecdesiastes i. 
13, "this sore travail hath God given to the sons of man to be exercised 
there with" =" to afflict them" as the margin reads. See P. R. I. 156. 

exorbitant, in. 177; strictly, 'going out of its circuit or track* 
(Lat. orbita} ; e.g. like a star leaving its orbit. Cf. M. in The Reason 
of Church Government , 11. 3, "the proper sphere wherein the magistrate 
cannot but confine his motion without a hideous exorbitancy from law," 
*. IV. H. 497. Here the general notion ' excessive,' e.g. of price, 
demands. Minsheu has : " exorbitant, things properly out of circle, 
square or rule, things irregular, enormieus." 

explode, x. 546, XL 669; used = Lat. explodere, 'to drive off the 
stage,' i.e. by clapping (ex, ' off, away ' +plaudere, ' to clap '). So in the 
Animadversions upon the Remonstrant's Defence, "ceremonies, liturgies 
and tyrannies, which God and man are now ready to explode and hiss 
out of the land," P. W. in. 43. Blount's Glossographia has, "explode, 
publickly to disgrace, or drive out by hissing, or clapping of hands." 

fame, i. 651, n. 346; for the literal sense 'rumour, report' ( = Lat. 



GLOSSARY. 7O5 

fama}, cf. Bacon, Of Seditions : "as if fames were the reliques of 
seditions past," and again: "seditious tumults and seditious fames 
differ no more but as brother and sister, masculine and feminine" 
(Pitt Tress ed., p. 39). 

fare, n. 940, iv. 131, 'to journey, travel'; the literal sense of A.S. 
faran ; cf. Germ, fahren, ' to travel.' So often in Spenser ; cf. The 
Faerie Queene, II. i. 2, n. 2. 12. 

flaw, x. 698, 'a gust of wind'; a poetic word. Cf. Hamlet ', v. i. 
239, " the winter's flaw "; and Tennyson, Marriage of Geraint, " Like 
flaws in summer laying lusty corn." In Scotland it is used of a storm 
of snow, in Norfolk of a sharp shower. The same 2^ flaw, ' a crack ' = 
Swedish flaga, 'a crack,' also 'a blast of wind'; the radical notion being 
' a sudden burst.' 

fledge, vu. 420 ; cf. in. 627. Minsheu has, "fledge, or feathered." 
Cf. Holland's Pliny (1601), X. 9, "The young cuckoo being once fledge 
and readie to flie abroad." This adj. fledge (whence fledge-ling} is 
really older than the p. p. Jledged which we use. Akin iojlee, fly, flight. 

foil, x. 375, 'a defeat ' ; cf. the Paraphrase on Psalm cxiv. made by 
M. in his boyhood, "As a faint host that hath received the foil." O. Fr. 
fouler, ' to trample under foot ' ; cf. foule, ' a crowd.' The original 
notion is seen in The Faerie Queene, v. 1 1. 33 : 

"Whom he did all to peeces breake, and foyle 
In filthy durt, and left so in the loathely soyle." 

fond, in. 449, VIII. 195, 209, ' foolish' ; its old meaning. Cf. King 
Lear, iv. 7. 60, " I am a very foolish fond old man." Hence fondly = 
'foolishly,' in. 470, vu. 152; cf. Lycidas, 56, "Ay me! I fondly 
dream." It is still quite common as a dialect-word equivalent to 'daft,' 
especially in north-country phrases like 'as fond as a besom' (or ' gate'). 
Originally fond was the p. p. of a Middle E. verb fonnen, 'to act like a 
fool,' from the noun0, * a fool.' The root is Scandinavian. 

founder, i. 204, n. 940; properly 'to sink to the bottom' (Lat. 
fundus, FT. fond, 'bottom'); cf. night-foundered  I. 204, Comus, 483. 

frame, n. 924, ' fabric ' ; a favourite word with M. and with writers 
like Dryden and Thomson who were influenced by his diction (see n. 
898, v. 154, notes). Similar is the Lucretian phrase moles et machina 
mundi (v. 96) ; cf. Spenser, An Hymne of Heavenly Love, 22, " this 
worlds great frame," and his Hymne of Heavenly Beautie, 30, 31. 

frequent, i. 797, vu. 504 ; in the sense of Lat. frequens, 'crowded.' 
Cf. Ben Jonson, Seanus, " 'Tis Caesar's will to have a frequent senate." 
M. twice uses "in full frequence " = ' in full assembly' (Lat. frequentia) ; 
cf. P. R. i. 128, u. 130. Cf. Tennyson, The Princess, IV., "Not in this 
frequence can I lend full tongue." 

P. L, 45 



706 PARADISE LOST. 

fretted, I. 717 ; from the verb fret='to work or design with rets.* 
A fret was a small band; the word comes from O. Fr. frete, 'an iron 
band ' = Ital. ferrata, 'an iron grating' (cf. Lat. ferrum, 'iron'). 
"Fret-work" was specially used of a kind of gilding for the roofs of 
halls ; being a pattern formed by small gilt bands or frets intersecting 
each other at right angles. Cf. Bacon, Advancement of Learning, 11. 
14. 9, "beautiful works and orders, like therets in the roofs of houses" ; 
where Mr Aldis Wright says, "the Egyptian key pattern is a familiar 
example." So Milton uses the word here, and Shakespeare in Hamlet ', 
II. 2.313, " this majestical roof fretted with golden fire." Quite distinct 
is the other verb, fret, ' to adorn,' from A.S.fratzuan. 

frore, II. 595, 'frosty'; from A.S. froren, 'frozen,' the p. p. of 
freosan, 'to freeze.' Spenser has the adj. frory, 'frozen,' in The 
Faerie Queene, ill. 8. 35, and frorne, 'frozen,' in The Shepheards 
Calender, February. 

galaxy, vn. 579 ; Gk. yaaias (i.e. ciJcXos), 'Milky Way' (literally 
' circle ') ; from yda, ' milk.' Cf. Tennyson, The Lady of Shalott : 
" Like to some branch of stars we see 
Hung in the golden Galaxy." 

glozing, in. 93, 'flattering.' Middle E. glosen meant 'to make 
glosses, explain,' from O.Fr. -<w = Late Lat. glossa, Gk. 7w<r<ra, which 
signified ' the tongue, a language, a word, a word needing explanation, 
an explanation.' But since many explanations are false, the verb glosen 
got the idea 'to interpret falsely,' whence 'to deceive.' So glozing 
'deceptive' ; cf. George Herbert, The Dotage, " False glozing pleasures." 
Especially used of flattering, false speech (ix. 549); cf. Comus, 161, 
"And well-placed words of glozing courtesy." 

goblin, II. 688. Derived through the French from Late Lat. 
gobelinus, a diminutive of Lat. fobalus, 'a mountain-sprite, demon' = Gk. 
K63aXo$, ' a rogue,' or 'a goblin supposed to befriend rogues.' 

gonfalon, v. 589, a " banner, or square standard born on the top of 
a launce" (Cotgrave, 1611). The earlier form was gonfanon cf. The 
Romaunt of the Rose, " I bare of loue the gonfenoun." O. Fr. gonfanon 
Middle High Germ, gundfano, 'battle-flag.' 

Gordian, iv. 348 = Lat. Gordius, 'pertaining to Gordius' (Gk. 
r6p8tos). According to the legend, Gordius, the first king of Phrygia, 
tied an inextricable knot, the undoer of which was promised by an 
oracle the sovereignty of Asia. Alexander the Great cut the knot 
with his sword and fulfilled the oracle by conquering Asia. Cf. the old 
play Lingua (1607) : 

"The Gordian knot which Alexander Great 
Did whilom cut with his all-conquering sword." 



GLOSSARY. .707 

Hence Gordian =' inextricable.' Cf. George Herbert, Dimnitie, " Who 
can these Gordian knots untie ? " 

grain, v. 285, xi. 242 ; derived from O. Fr. graine, Lat. granum, 
the Low Latin equivalent for the classical word coccum. Properly 
coccum meant a 'berry'; but it was specially used of the cochineal 
insect found upon the scarlet oak in Spain and other Mediterranean 
countries; this insect being, from its shape, supposed to be a berry. 
From the cochineal insect a certain dye was made, called coccum ; 
whence coccinus ' red.' In Low Latin granum took the place of 
coccum. Strictly, therefore, grain signified a scarlet dye such as could 
be extracted from this cochineal insect. Cf. Cotgrave : " Graine : the 
seed of herbs, also grain wherewith cloth is dyed in grain, scarlet die." 
But Cotgrave also has " Migraine : Scarlet, or Purple in graine," and 
it seems as though the word had lost something of its original sense, 
and could be applied to shades of blue or purple. Cf. Lycidas, 142 
(the first draft of the lines). 

grunsel, I. 460 = ground-sill. Minsheu (1625) has, "a Groundsell of 
a doore ; vide Threshold," and the old Latin Dictionary called Manipulus 
Vocabulorum (1570) has, "A grunsen hypotheron" (Early English Text 
Society's ed., p. 164). The second part of the word, sill, is akin to Germ. 
schwelle, ' threshold. ' 

gryphon, n. 943 ; Lat. gryphus, from Gk. ypfy ; also in Late Lat. 
griffus, whence the other form griffin. A third form in Elizabethan E. 
was gripe ; cf. Shakespeare, Lucrece, 543. 

harald, i. 752, u. 518, ( herald'; always spelt haraldo.t. Ital. 
araldo in the original editions of Paradise Lost. It illustrates Milton's 
liking for Italian forms. 

harbinger, ix. 13, xi. 589, 'a forerunner ' ; in P. R. i. 71, 277, John 
the Baptist is called the " harbinger " of Christ. Originally it meant an 
officer who went in advance of an army or prince to make provision 
for the night's shelter. Cf. Florio's Dictionary (1598), "Foriere, a 
harbinger for a camp or a prince," and Bullokar's Expositor (1616): 
" Harbinger, one that taketh up lodging for others." From Icelandic 
herbergi, ' an army shelter ' ; cf. the cognate German words heer, 
' army ' + bergen, ' to shelter. ' 

heinous, ix. 929, x. r ; spelt hainous in the original editions, as 
often in old writers. Fr. haineux, 'hateful.' 

highth, i. 24, II. 95 ; always written thus by M. The form is 
common in Hakluyt's Voyages, and is said to survive in parts of 
America. High-th is curious in that it retains the th of the A.S. word 
hehu, represented now by t cf. heigh-t. 

hosanna, in. 348, vi. 205, ' save, I pray' (or 'we pray') ; na being a 

452 



70S PARADISE LOST. 

particle expressing entreaty, while the first part of the word is from the 
stem 'to save,' whence the name Jesus = 'Saviour,' and Joshua. Com- 
monly hosanna is a cry for deliverance ; but sometimes of praise, as 
in Malt. xxi. 9, "Hosanna to the son of David... Hosanna in the 
highest." From the use of hosanna in that passage Palm-Sunday was 
called 'Hosanna-Sunday' in the mediaeval Western Church. 

hosting, vi. 93, 'an encounter.' The more usual sense was 'the 
raising or assembling of an army or host ' ; especially in the feudal 
phrase 'hosting and hunting.' 

hubbub, n. 951, xn. 60, 'confused din'; put for hoop-hoop, a 
reduplication of hoop, ' a cry of surprise ' cf. O. Fr. houper, ' to shout.' 
Also written ivhoobnb, as in The Winters Tale, IV. 4. 628. Cf. 
'^>ing (or ' hooping ')-cough.' 

hyaline, vn. 619, 'the glassy sea ' ; Gk. udXcroj, ' made of crystal or 
glass,' from CaXoj, 'glass'; cf. Lat. hyalinus, 'glassy' (borrowed from 
Greek). No doubt, M. was thinking of Revelation iv. 6, where the 
Greek is 0dXa<r<ra vaXlvrj 6fj.oia tpwrrdXXy = " a sea of glass like unto 
crystal." Cf. Tennyson's Juvenilia, " Twin peaks shadow'd with pine 
slope to the dark hyaline." 

impair. The usual sense in Milton is ' to harm, damage,' which 
agrees with the etymology, impejorare, 'to make worse'; cf. IX. 144, 
'. R. IV. 592, where, in each case, it is the opposite of repair. But 
sometimes, e.g. in V. 665 and vi. 690, 691, there lurks the idea of 
' equality,' as if M. connected it with Lat. impar, ' unequal.' 

impress, ix. 35, 'a device, generally with motto, on a coat of arms, 
scutcheon, shield.' Also spelt imprese = lte. impresa, 'a device, 
emblem' ; literally ' something impressed,' i.e. stamped. Cf. Richard II. 
III. i. 24, 35 : 

"From my own windows torn my household coat, 

Razed out my imprese, leaving me no sign" ; 
i.e. the family coat of arms blazoned on the stained glass. 

influence, n. 1034, Late Lat. influentia, literally 'a flowing in 
upon.' It was an astrological term applied to the power over the 
earth, men's characters, fortunes etc., which was supposed to descend 
from the celestial bodies. Cf. "planetary influence," King Lear ; i. 2. 
136, "skyey influences," Measure for Measure, III. i. 9. M. generally 
uses influence with reference to this astrological notion ; cf. iv. 669, 
VII. 374, 375 (horn Job xxxviii. 31), VIII. 513. See also Bacon's Essays 
Of Envy and Of Vicissitude (Pitt Press ed., pp. 21, 172). Other terms 
due to astrology are ' disastrous ' (i. 597), ' saturnine,' 'jovial.' 

innumerous, vn. 455 = Lat. innumerosus, 'numberless'; a poetic 
use. Cf. Tennyson, The Princess, v., "A lisping of the innumerous 
leaf." Thomson has it twice in Spring. 



GLOSSARY. 709 

intend, n. 457, 'attend to, consider.' A clergyman, says Selden, 
"must seriously intend his calling" (Table-Talk, p. 116). Cf. Lat. 
intendere animum. 

inure, n. 216, vin. 239, 'to accustom,' literally 'to bring into 
practice' ( = ure). For the obsolete noun ure (O. Fr. cure, Lat. opera, 
'work'), cf. Bacon, Of Simulation, "it maketh him practise simu- 
lation in other things, lest his hand should be out of ure." Cf. 



its. In Elizabethan English the regular neuter possessive pronoun 
was his; cf. Genesis iii. 15, "it shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt 
bruise his heel." About 1600 its came into use, but slowly. Bacon 
has its rarely: the Bible of 1611 never; the nine instances in the 
ist Folio (1623) of Shakespeare may be corrupt, since in every extant 
work published during his lifetime the old idiom his is invariable 
cf. Julius Ccesar, i. 2. 123, 124, "that same eye. ..did lose his lustre." 
Milton, as an Elizabethan in his diction, avoids its : either (i) by 
personifying the noun: thus in his prose abstract words like 'virtue,' 
'truth,' are always followed by her', or (2) by retaining the old neuter 
use of his. 

The only places in Milton's verse where its occurs are I. 254, IV. 813 : 
and Nativity Ode, 106. I know but two instances of its in his prose 
Areopagitica and The Reason of Church Government, P. W. n. 94, 471. 

justle, n. Qi^=jostle ; connected vhjoust (often spelt just), from 
j&.jitxta, 'close to.' For the form (then common) cf. The Tempest, 
v. 158. 

knot, iv. 242, 'a flower-bed.' M. recollected Love's Labour's Lost, 
I. i. 249, "thy curious-knotted garden," i.e. laid out in nicely-arranged 
beds. The Elizabethan physician Dr Dee says in his Diary, " I hired 
Walter Hooper, to kepe my hedges and knots in good order " (Camden 
Society's ed. , p. 3). Cf. Richard . in. 4. 43 46. It survives as a west- 
country word, though generally in the compound flower -knot. 

landskip, n. 491 ; here and in the three other places where it 
occurs iv. 153, V. 142, L' Allegro, 70 spelt lantskip in the original 
editions. It was a term borrowed from Dutch artists (cf. Dutch land- 
schap), and its forms in E. have been various e.g. landschaft, landschape, 
landshape, landscip. For landskip (apparently the oldest form in E.) 
cf. Cotgrave (1611), " Paisage : Landskip, countrey worke " ; and The 
Spectator, 94, "a beautiful and spacious landskip." Tennyson uses 
landscip in Merlin and Vivien and Romney's Remorse. The suffix -skip 
(or -scape), generally softened to -ship, is closely connected with the 
noun shape. 

lawn, iv. 252; properly 'an open, grass-covered space in a forest, 



7IO PARADISE LOST. 

a glade clear of trees'; hence any 'pasture* or 'green.' A favourite 
poetic word ; cf. Comus, 568, 965, Lycidas, 25. 

leviathan, i. 201, vn. 412; then commonly identified with the whale, 
though the Hebrew livydthdn " denotes any great sea or land monster, 

as the crocodile or some large serpent." Cf. Psalm Ixxiv. 14, 

" Thou brakest the heads of leviathan in pieces," i.e. the crocodile, 
symbolising Egypt ; and Isaiah xxvii. i, "even leviathan that crooked 
serpent" In Psalm civ. 26, " There go the ships : there is that levia- 
than," leviathan stands for any large sea-monster. 

libbard, vn. 467 ; an Elizabethan form of leopard, so called because 
thought to be a cross-breed between a lion (Ico) and a pard, i.e. panther 
(pardus). Cf. Spenser, The Ritines of Time, "Who of the Grecian 
Libbard now ought heares?" So in Loves Labour's Lost, v. 2. 551. 

limbec, in. 607; short for alembic, 'a vessel for distilling.' It is 
one of those hybrid words of Arabic + Greek origin which came into 
Spain through the Moors and then passed into European languages. 
Arabic al, ' the ' + afc, 'a still,' from Gk. dx3i, 4 a cup.' See Macbeth, 
I. 7. 67, and Dryden's Annus Mirabilis, stanzas 13 and 166. 

limber, vn. 476, ' flexible ' ; correctly written limper, and akin to 
limp. Cf. The Winters Tale, I. 2. 47 (where the use is figurative), 
and Giles Fletcher, Chris fs Victorie in Heaven, 57, " And oft the 
Sun would cleave the limber mould" (i.e. friable). 

limbo, in. 495 ; strictly a term of Roman Catholic theology. 
"The Latin word Limbus (or 'fringe') was used in the middle ages 
for that place on the fringe or outskirts of hell in which the just 
who died before Christ were detained till our Lord's resurrection 
from the dead. It likewise signifies a place (also supposed to be 
beneath the earth and on the outskirts of hell) inhabited by infants 
who die in original sin " (Addis and Arnold, Catholic Diet.). The first 
of these was the Limbus Patrum, the second the Limbus Infantium. 
Later arose the popular belief in a third region, the Limbus Fatuorum 
the " Paradise of Fools " (iv. 496) after death and receptacle of all vain 
and foolish things. See Henry VIII. v. 4. 67. Dante places Vergil in 
Limbo (the First Circle of his Inferno) and makes him explain who are 
there and why (Inferno, iv. 31 63), viz. the just that "were before 
Christianity." See also the Purgatorio, vn. 2836, XXII. 97114. 

list, ' wish, please ' ; commonly a present (11. 798), but also used as 
a preterite by M. (u. 656, iv. 803). Shakespeare, who uses the 
present tense often, once has listed '; cf. Richard III. ill. 5. 84. Akin 
to lust, which often meant ' pleasure ' (Germ, lust) ; cf. Psalm xcii. 10, 
" Mine eye also shall see his lust of mine enemies" (Prayer- Book). 

livery, IV. 599, vn. 478; used by Elizabethan writers = any kind 



GLOSSARY. 711 

of dress, garb; cf. L? Allegro, 62, "The clouds in thousand liveries 
dight." Originally livery meant whatever was given (i.e. delivered] by 
a lord to his household, whether food, money, or garments. Fr. livrer 
= Low Lat. liberare, 'to abandon.' 

malignant, x. 662, * injurious, hostile ' ; often used by Elizabethans 
with reference to astrology, as here. Cf. i Henry VI. IV. 5. 6. 

manuring, iv. 628, xi. 28. The verb manure= t to cultivate, till* 
(properly with the hand) was not uncommon in Elizabethan E. Minsheu 
(1625) has: "to manure, or till the ground, to worke and labour the 
earth with the hand." Cf. Bacon, Advancement of Learning, n. (ed. 
Aldis Wright, p. 84), " It is one thing to set forth what ground lieth 
unmanured, and another thing to correct ill husbandry in that which is 
manured " ; and Othello, I. 3. 328. M. has it often in his prose-works 
(P. IV. II. 463, in. 78). And good- (or well-) mannered is still quite 
a common agricultural term for land with a good crop on it. From 
Fr. mana'uvre='Lovf Lat. manuopera, 'a working with the hand' (manus). 

marble, in. 564, 'bright as marble' (from root mar-, 'to gleam'). 
Cf. Gk. napnalpeiv, 'to glisten,' papjLapeos , 'glistening,' used of the stars 
or sky. In Cymbeline, V. 4. 120, 121 Shakespeare applies "marble" 
and "radiant " to the sky in the same sentence. 

marish, xn. 630 ; cognate with marsh ; cf. also mere (as in Winder- 
mere] and Germ, meer, ' the sea.' Though common in earlier writers 
(see The Faerie Queene, V. 10. 23), marish was becoming obsolete 
when M. wrote; it only occurs once in the A.V., Ezekiel xlvii. n, 
" the miry places thereof and the marishes thereof shall not be healed," 
where the Genevan Bible (1562) had the same rendering. Baret's 
Alvearie (1580) gives, "A fenne or marise, a moore often drowned 
with water." It is one of Tennyson's archaic words; cf. Mariana, 
" The cluster'd marish-mosses crept," and The Dying Swan, 2 and 3. 

maw, II. 847, x. 601, 991, 'stomach'; cf. Germ, magen. A vulgar 
word applied rather to animals than men. Cf. Milton's Sonnet to 
Cromwell : 

" Help us to save free conscience from the paw 
Of hireling wolves, whose Gospel is their maw." 

meath, v. 345, a sweet wine, especially one made with honey; 
'mead.' Chaucer writes meth, the dialect-form still current in 
Cheshire; cf. the Welsh metheglin (a sweet beverage, mentioned in 
The Merry Wives of Windsor, V. 5. 167), from Welsh meddyglyn, 
mead-liquor.' A.S. meodu, Gk. p0v t Sanskrit madhu, 'honey,' are 
cognate. 

minim, vn. 482, 'a tiny creature'; from Lat. minimus, 'very 
small.' The use is said to survive in Cornwall, e.g. "come in, you 



712 PARADISE LOST. 

minum ! " Cf. A Mid summer -Nights Dream, III. i. 328, 3-29, "you 
dwarf, you minimus." 

mood, i. 550, or mode, 'key,' 'measure,' a musical term ; cf. S. A. 
662. Lat. modus ; distinct from mood, ' disposition ' (Germ, mutti). 

mysterious, vm. 599, ' full of awe ' such as befits a mystery (cf. iv. 
743, 750) like marriage; cf. Ephesians v. 32, "This is a great mystery" 
said in allusion to marriage. So in Comus, 785, "The sublime notion 
and high mystery." Mystery (Gk. nvar-qpiov, ' a secret rite,' from ^tfeu>, 
'to close the eyes or mouth') used in a religious sense means a truth 
specially revealed to men, or a spiritual rite of deep significance. Thus 
in the Prayer-Book it is applied to the Holy Communion. 

nice, iv. 741, v. 433, vm. 399; derived from Lat. nescius, 'ignorant,' 
nice meant 'foolish,' then 'fastidious, dainty,' i.e. foolish in a particular 
way. So here and in P. R. iv. 157, " Nothing will please the difficult 
and nice" i.e. people hard to satisfy (difficiles). Few words improve 
in sense as nice has. 

oblivious, i. 266, 'causing to forget, producing forgetfulness ' ; cf. 
Macbeth, v. 3. 43, "some sweet oblivious antidote." So Horace uses 
obliviosus of wine (Odes II. 7. 21) ; and M. speaks of obliviosce...Lethes 
aqua in De Idea Platonica, 20. Pope borrowed Milton's phrase ; cf. 
The Dunciad, ill. 43, 44: 

"Oh ! born to see what none can see awake ! 
Behold the wonders of th' oblivious lake." 

obnoxious; always used by M. in its Latin sense 'liable to' (ob- 
noxius). Cf. The Tenure of Kings, "made obnoxious to the doom 
of law," and The Reason of Church Government, I. 6, "from that time 
his creature, and obnoxious to comply with his ends in state " (P. W. 
n. 32, 461). So in ix. 170, 1094, and S. A. 106. Cf. Bacon, Of 
Ambition, "as for the having of them obnoxious to ruin, if they be of 
fearful natures, it may do well." 

obvious ; always used by M. in one of the senses of Latin obvius 
e.g. ' coming to meet' (vm. 504, X. 106), or ' lying in the way' (vi. 69). 

officious, vm. 99 ; used = Lat. officiosus, ' obliging, ready to serve by 
doing officia, i.e. kind acts.' Cf. P. R. II. 302, where Satan, coming 
back after his first repulse, says, "With granted leave officious I return," 
i.e. eager to serve Christ. 

opacous, in. 418, vm. 23; from Lat. opacus, 'dark,' but more 
commonly opaque as in in. 619 ; cf. Fr. opaque. Minsheu has, 
"Opacwous, shadowie, darke and blacke." 

orient, I. 546, n. 399, in. 507, ' bright, lustrous.' In Elizabethan 
poetry it is a constant epithet of gems, especially pearls. Perhaps, used 
thus, it first meant ' eastern,' gems coming from the Orient or East ; 



GLOSSARY. 713 

then as these were bright it got the notion ' lustrous,' which suits, I 
believe, every passage where M. uses it, though in one or two places 
(e.g. in IV. 644) ' rising ' = Lat. oriens is possible. Commonly he 
applies it to jewels or liquids; cf. v. 2, Comus, 65. 

ove, ix. 1141 ; in its original sense ' to have, possess.' Cf. Macbeth, 
I. 4. 10, "To throw away the dearest thing he owed," and The Tempest, 
III. i. 45. Closely akin to own. 

panim, I. 765 ; another form of pagan, from Late Lat. paganus, 
'heathen.' Strictly O.E. paynyme meant 'heathendom,' 'the country of 
the heathen,' and a 'heathen man' was payen or payn. Tennyson uses 
paynim often in the Idylls of the King. 

paramount, n. 508, 'lord, chief; originally a legal term for the 
lord of an estate under whom land was rented. Cf. Blount's Glosso- 
graphia, " Paramount is in our Law the highest Lord of the Fee." 
O. Fr. paramont, 'at the top, above ' = Lat. per + ad montem. 

pavilion, II. 960, 'palace.' M. refers to Psalm xviii. n, "He made 
darkness his secret place ; his pavilion round about him were dark 
waters and thick clouds of the skies " where, however, the sense is 
less 'palace' than 'tent,' as sometimes in M. Cf. v. 653, XI. 215. 
Through Fr. pavilion from Lat. papilio, 'a butterfly,' used by Late Latin 
writers to mean 'a tent' because a tent is spread out like the wings of a 
butterfly. 

pioner, I. 676 ; O. Fr. peonier, ' foot-soldier,' Ital. pedone. For-er= 
-eer as a suffix in Elizabethan E. cf. "charioter," vi. 390 ; "mutiner," 
Coriolamts, I. 1.254; "enginer" and "pioner," Hamlet, I. 5. 163 and 
in. 4. -206. 

pitch, vni. 198. A term in falconry for the height to which a hawk 
soars. Cf. Richard If. I. i. 109, "How high a pitch his resolution 
soars ! " M. perhaps refers to this use ; cf. " lower flight" 199. 

plat, ix. 456 ; another form of plot, ' a small piece of ground.' Cf. 
2 Kings ix. 26, "and I will requite thee in this plat... Now therefore 
take and cast him into the plat of ground." So in  Penseroso, 73 : 
"Oft, on a plat of rising ground, 
I hear the far-off curfew sound." 

plumb-down, II. 933, 'straight down, in a vertical line.' Plumb 
meant (i) a mass of lead (Lat. plumbum], attached to a cord and used 
in determining whether a wall is perpendicular ; (2) the vertical or per- 
pendicular position so determined. In modern E. b has softened into 
p= plump, 'straight downward.' 

pomp; apart from its ordinary meanings (i. 372, II. 257) it is used 
like Gk. 7ro*7n7, Lat. pompa, in the two kindred senses ' solemn pro- 
cession ' (vil. 564), and 'train, retinue' (vni. 61). Cf. King John, 



714 PARADISE LOST. 

in. i. 304. Bullokar's Expositor, an old (1616) English dictionary, 
has, " Po mfc... a solemn trained 

ponder, iv. 1001 ; in the literal sense of Lat. ponderare, ' to weigh ' ; 
a rare use, but cf. Surrey's Poems : 

" Hot gleams of burning fire, and easy sparks of flame, 

In balance of unequal weight he pondereth by aim." 
The old English-Lat. Dictionary called Manipulus Vocabulonim (1570) 
has, " to ponder, ponderare, librare" 

portcullis, ii. 874, a kind of grating, made of timber or iron, sliding 
up and down in vertical grooves, and forming part of a gateway. Here 
the portcullis came down over and protected the lock of the gate : 
Sin had to raise it before she could get at the keyhole. Lat. porta 
colattca, 'a sliding door'; cf. Fr. cottier, 'to flow,' coulisse, 'a slide, 
groove. ' 

prevent, u. 467, 739, x. 987, 'to anticipate, forestall'; cf. Psalm 
cxix. 148, " Mine eyes prevent the night watches," and i Thessalonians 
iv. 15, "we which are alive... shall not prevent them which are asleep," 
i.e. 'rise before.' Literally 'to come before,' Lat. pravenire. 

prick, II. 536, 'to ride hard,' literally 'to spur a horse on'; cf. 
Tennyson, Gareth and Lynette, " And Gareth crying prick'd against 
the cry." See The Faerie Queene, I. i. i, v. 10. 31. In Piers the 
Ploiuman ' ' prykiere " = a rider. 

puny, ii. 367; perhaps in the literal sense 'born later, younger,' 
mankind having been created after the angels; cf. the Areopagitica, 
" like a puny with his guardian," i.e. a young man not yet of age (P. IV. 
II. 79). But 'weak, inferior* would also suit. The term "Puisne 
Judge" shows the etymology (Fr. puts nt). 

purchase, x. 579, 'prey.' The verb purchase meant first 'to hunt 
after' (O. Yr.purchacer=.Yr. pour + chasser) ; "then to take in hunting; 
then to acquire; and then, as the commonest way of acquiring is by 
giving money in exchange, to buy" (Trench). 'To acquire, gain' 
was a common Elizabethan sense; cf. i Timothy iii. 13, "they that 
have used the office of a deacon well purchase to themselves a good 
degree" (Revised Version "gain"). 

purlieu, II. 833, 'anoutskirt'; strictly of a forest, as in iv. 404. Some- 
times land which had been taken from its owner and made part of a 
forest was restored to him or his successor. The process whereby this 
was done was called perambulatio = ' a walking over the land to settle 
its boundaries'; then the land itself came in legal Latin to be called 
perambulatio, rendered in French by potiralle. The form purlieu, 
from pourallee, was influenced by a wrong derivation from Fr. pur 
lieu =purus locus, ' a space clear of trees.' 



GLOSSARY. 715 



purple, IV. 764. Lat. purpureus, like Gk. Trop^tfpeos, was not 
limited to what we call ' purple,' but denoted almost any rich colour, 
e.g. red, rosy, crimson, and in poets any dazzling, bright hue (as where 
Horace applies it to white swans, Odes iv. i. 10). We find the same 
wide use in English (especially the Elizabethan) poets. Thus in 
Shakespeare it is used of blood several times; cf. Romeo and Juliet ', 
I. i. 92. Often it is only a picturesque, literary epithet, as in Gray's 
" The bloom of young Desire, and purple light of Love" {Progress of 
Poesy, 41); cf. iv. 763, 764, and Vergil's lumen juventa purpureum 
(ALn. I. 590, 591). 

purpose, iv. 337, vin. 337; in sense and origin = Fr. propos, 'con- 
versation.' So the verb propose = ' talk' in Shakespeare, e.g. in Much 
Ado About Nothing, in. i. 2, 3: 

" There shall thou find my cousin Beatrice 
Proposing with the prince and Claudio." 

Spenser often has pttrpose = ' discourse ' ; cf. The Faerie Queene, I. 
12, 13. 

quarry, x. 281, 'prey' ; a hunting-term. O. Fr. cuiree, the intes- 
tines of a slain animal, the part given to the hounds ; so called because 
wrapped in the skin Fr. cuir, 'a skin, hide,' from Lat. corium, 'hide.' 

quire, in. 217, 666, vn. 254; the older form of choir  each from 
Lat. chorus. Cf. the Prayer-Book, "In quires and places where they 
sing." Quire was one of the Latin words introduced through Christianity. 

ramp, iv. 343, vn. 466; a word used in several allied senses, 
e.g. 'to rage' cf. "a ramping and a roaring lion," Psalm xxii. 13, 
Prayer- Book ; ' to tear, snatch' ; 'to rear up on the hind legs ' cf. the 
heraldic term "lion rampant"; 'to spring.' Cf. S. A. 139, "his lion 
ramp "= lion-like spring. Fr. ramper, 'to climb.' 

rapt, m. 522, vn. 23, 'caught up.' It should be written rapped, 
being the p. p. of an old verb rap, ' to seize' ; cf. Cymbeline, I. 6. 51, 
"what... raps you?" i.e. excites you? The form rapt comes through 
confusion (of sound and sense) with Lat. raptus, the p. p. of rapere, 
'to seize.' 

ravin, x. 599, 'prey' ; cf. The Faerie Queene, I. n. 12 (the descrip- 
tion of the ' Old Dragon ') : 

"his deepe devouring jawes 
Wyde gaped, like the griesly mouth of hell, 
Through which into his darke abysse all ravin fell." 
O. Fr. ravine, Lat. rapina, 'plunder.' 

reck, ' to care ' ; A.S. reccan. M. uses the word both personally 
(II. 50, IX. 173) and impersonally; cf. Lycidas, 122, "What recks it 
them? What need they? They are sped," and Comus, 404. In Shake- 



716 PARADISE LOST. 

speare it is always personal, as in Hamlet, I. 3. 51 ("recks not his own 
rede"). M. uses reckoning with the strict etymological notion of 'caring, 
troubling,' in the phrase to 'make little reckoning of ' ; cf. Comus, 642, 
Lycidas, 116. The old word wretchless means 'careless,' the w having 
been prefixed wrongly; cf. the Articles of Religion, xvii. 

recorder, i. 551, a kind of flute or flageolet; cf. the title of a 
musical work published in 1686, "The Delightful Companion, or 
Choice New Lessons for the Recorder or Flute" So called from the 
old verb record^ 1 to sing' ; cf. Fairfax, Tasso, II. 97, " to hear the lark 
record her hymns." Selden says in his Table-Talk: "a bird, by often 
whistling to, learns a tune, and a month after records to herself" (p. 149, 
Reynolds' ed.). By " soft " M. implies not effeminate strains but the 
sweet, subdued notes of the instrument ; cf. Fletcher's Piscatorie Eclogues, 
Vii. 3, "the sad recorder sweetly plains." 

rhyme ; spelt (in the First Ed.) rhime in I. 16 but rime (the 
proper spelling, A.S. rim) in the Preface. Possibly M. used rhime 
(i.e. rhyme) = poetry opposed to prose, and rime= rhymed metre 
opposed to blank verse. The spelling rhyme is due to confusion with 
rhythm, Gk. pvdndt. 

Satoaean, iv. 162, 'belonging to Saba. 1 Saba is the classical form, 
used in the Septuagint and Vulgate, of Sheba, which "embraced the 
greater part of Arabia Felix" (Smith's Bible Diet.). The Eliza- 
bethans constantly write Saba; cf. Marlowe's Fanstus, v. 154, "As 
wise as Saba" (i.e. the Queen of Sheba), and XH. 12, "India, Saba, 
and farther countries in the east." In Comus, 996 (" Elysian dew"), 
the Cambridge MS. shows that the earlier reading was Sabizan. 

sad, v. 94, vi. 541, 'serious' ; the original sense was 'sated,' A.S. 
seed being akin to Lat. satis ; then came the notion 'serious, sober, 
grave,' as often in Shakespeare. Cf. An Apology for Smectymnuus, 
"to be severe and ever of a sad gravity," and the History of Britain, 
" this story, though seeming otherwise too light in the midst of a sad 
narration" (P. W. ill. 129, v. 387). Cf. Comus > 189,  Penseroso, 43. 

satiate, i. 179. Elizabethan English often makes the past parti- 
ciples of verbs of Latin origin conform with the Latin. This is the 
case especially with verbs of which the Latin originals belong to the ist 
and 3rd conjugations. Cf. elevate (n. 558) = Lat. elevatus and suspense 
(II. 48)=suspensus. Further, participles not from the Latin are ab- 
breviated by analogy; e.g. Milton (i. 193) has uplift = 'uplifted,' 
though lift is of Scandinavian origin. 

scathe, I. 613, 'to injure'; rare as verb, but cf. Romeo and Juliet, 
I. 5. 86, "This trick may chance to scathe you." For the noun cf. 
King John, II. 75, "To do offence and scath in Christendom." The 



GLOSSARY. 717 

Manipulus Vocabulorum (1570) has, "to scathe, nocere," and Minsheu 
(1617), " to scathe, or hurt." 

sciential, ix. 837, 'yielding knowledge.' Ben Jonson in a compli- 
ment to James I. says (Masque of Blackness] : 

" His light sciential is, and, past mere nature, 
Can salve the rude defects of every creature." 

scull, VII. 402 ; the same word as shoal and school', cf. the nautical 
expression ' a school of fish.' Scull is used specially of fish ; cf. Shake- 
speare, Troilus and Cressida, V. 5. 22. On some coasts (e.g. the 
south-eastern) of England her ring- shoals are still called sculls. In the 
New Forest dialect scull is used contemptuously for ' a set of low 
people.' 

sdein, iv. 50; cf. Spenser, The Faerie Queene, III. i. 55: 
"For great rebuke it is love to despise, 

Or rudely sdeigne a gentle hart's [heart's] request." 
This form is modelled on Ital. sdegnare, while the common form disdain 
comes through O. Fr. desdegner. Lat. dis-, a negative prefix, + dignari, 
' to think worthy (dignus).'' 

secure, iv. 186, v. 238, ix. 371, x. 779. Elizabethan writers often 
use secure in the sense of Lat. securus, ' free from anxiety, unconcerned ' ; 
i.e. to indicate a false feeling rather than actual state of safety. Cf. 
Fletcher's quibbling lines: 

" To secure yourselves from these, 

Be not too secure in ease " ; 

and M. in Eikonoklastes, 18, "with a bloody surprise [he] falls on 
our secure forces which lay quartering at Brentford, in the thoughts 
and expectation of a treaty,'" P. W. I. 442. So security' over-con- 
fidence, carelessness,' in Macbeth, in. 5. 32. "Captain Secure" is 
slain alongside of "Captain Boasting" in The Holy War. 

seneshal, ix. 38, 'steward '; literally ' old servant,' whence the idea 
* senior in standing, chief.' Through O. Fr. from Gothic sins, ' old ' 
+ shalks, 'servant'; cf. marshal, literally 'horse-servant.' 

Seraphim ; then supposed to come from a Hebrew root ' to burn ' ; 
cf. Blount, "Seraphim, i.e. fulgentes aut comburcntes', so called, for 
their burning with divine love and charity." Hence "fiery Seraphim," 
II. 512 ; " brightest Seraphim," ill. 381, and in At a Solemn Mustek, 10. 
Really Seraphim is from a root ' to exalt,' and means ' the exalted 
ones.' 

The plural of Seraph (in. 667) has much the same history as Cherub; 
Seraphins in some old writers cf. Thomas Watson's Eglogue (1590), 
" where Seraphins  doe Praise the highest in their glorious flames " 
(Arber, p. 169) ; Seraphims in the Bible, Isaiah vi. 2, 6; Seraphim in 



718 PARADISE LOST. 

M. Crashaw uses Seraphim several times as a singular in his beautiful 
poem The Flaming Heart, on Saint Teresa, e.g., 

"This is a Seraphim, they say, 
And this the great Teresia." 

sere, x. 1071, 'dry'; also spelt sear, A.S. sear, 'dry.' Commonly 
said of flowers or leaves, with the sense 'faded,' 'withered,' as in 
Lycidas, 2, "ivy never sere." 

sewer, ix. 38 ; a servant who set the dishes on the table at a feast 
and removed them. In Eikonoklastes, 24, M. refers contemptuously 
to the chaplains of Charles I. as " the sewers, or the yeomen-ushers 
of devotion," P. W. I. 459. Connected with A.S. seaw, 'pottage.' 

shroud, x. 1068. Properly shroud, A.S. scrtid, meant 'a garment': 
hence any * shelter, covering,' as often in Elizabethan writers. Cf. 
Comus, 147, " Run to your shrouds within these brakes and trees." 
Outside Old St Paul's Cathedral in London there was a covered place 
called " the Shrouds," where sermons were preached in wet weather, 
instead of at St Paul's Cross, which was in the open. 

Soldan, i. 764, ' Sultan ' ; cf. Minsheu (1625), " the great Soldane, 
or Sultan among the Turks or Persians." It is a thoroughly mediaeval 
word cf. the Inferno, V. 60 used often in reference to the Crusades ; 
cf. The Talisman. From Arabic Sultan, 'victorious,' Latinised as 
Soldanus, whence Ital. soldano, 

Sophi, x. 433 ; a corruption of Arabic safi, ' elect, chosen,' which 
was a title, like the ' Caesar ' of the Roman emperors, borne by each 
Shah or sovereign of the dynasty that ruled Persia from 1505 to 1725. 
In Elizabethan writers the expression ' the Sophy ' (or ' Soph* ') is 
exactly equivalent to ' the Shah ' in modern English. Cf. The Merchant 
of Venice, II. i. 25, "That slew the Sophy and a Persian prince"; and 
Ben Jonson's Volpone, ill. 5, "the Persian Sophi's wife." Persia is 
called "the Sophian Empire" in Hexham's English edition (1636) of 
Mer eater's Atlas, n. 411. 

sound, n. 604, vii. 399, 'a strait, narrow strip of water.' Cf. 
Comus, 115, "The sounds and seas, with all their finny drove" (i.e. 
shoals of fish). A.S. sund meant literally ' a strait of the sea that 
could be swum across.' 

sovran, i. 246, II. 244 ; spelt thus always in P. L. cf. Ital. sovrano. 
The common form sovereign = O. Fr. soverain, later souverain. Lat. 
suferanus, ' chief. ' 

spangle, vn. 384, XI. 130, ' to ornament as with spangles.' Spangle 
was used of small flashing ornaments like the little circles of silver in 
' tinsel.' Elizabethan writers often apply it to the stars ; cf. The 
Taming of the Shrew, iv. 5. 31, "What stars do spangle heaven with 



GLOSSARY. 719 

such beauty?" So in Comus, 1003 (an echo of A Midsummer-Night's 
Dream, II. i. 29), and Lycidas, 170. 

state, x. 445, 'canopy'; more often 'chair of state, canopied 
throne,' as in Macbeth, ill. 4. 5, "Our hostess keeps her state." 
Cotgrave, French Dictionary, 1611, explains dais by: "A cloth of 
Estate, Canopie or Heauen, that stands ouer the heads of Princes 
thrones, also, the whole State or seat of Estate." 

store, in. 444, v. 322, 'abundance'; common in Elizabethan E. 
One of Hey wood's Proverbs runs, "store is no sore." Cf. L? Allegro, 
121. O. Fr. estoire, 'store, provisions,' Low Lat. instaurum. 

sublimed, I. 235. In chemistry to * sublime' or ' sublimate' is "to 
raise a solid substance into vapour by heat." M. means that the 
material substance catching fire is raised to a state of pure flame. 

success, II. 9, 123; its usual sense in Elizabethan E. is 'result, 
fortune' how a person fares in a matter, or a thing turns out, whether 
well or ill. Cf. Shakespeare, Troilus and Cressida, II. 2. 117, "Nor 
fear of bad success in a bad cause." So P. R. iv. i. 

succinct, in. 643 ; Lat. succinctus, the past participle of succingere, 
' to gird, tuck up.' Cf. 7^he Rape of the Lock, in. 41, 42 : 
" Four Knaves in garbs succinct, a trusty band, 
Caps on their heads, and halberds in their hands." 

suggestion, ix. 90, 'temptation'; cf. Macbeth, i. 3. 134, "why do 
I yield to that suggestion?" So the verb; cf. Richard II. in. 4. 
75 76: 

"What Eve, what serpent, hath suggested thee 
To make a second fall of cursed man?" 

summed, vn. 421 ; a term in falconry, applied to a hawk that 
has the feathers full-grown and in full number. Cf. P. R. I. 14, 
"with prosperous wing full summed"; and Drayton's Polyolbion, 
Song u, "The muse from Cambria comes with pinions summed and 
sound." 

sung. In Elizabethan E. this incorrect form for the past tense is 
much used. Shakespeare has sang only once (Sonnet 73), and then for 
the rhyme. In M. sang occurs only three times, III. 383, VII. 192, 
Lycidas, 186, and in each case he probably used the form for a special 
consideration of sound (e.g. in in. 383, vn. 192 to avoid the jingle 
sung. ..son}. Similarly he has rung (n. 655, 723, ix. 737) as the past 
tense of ring, except in the Nativity Ode, 158, where the rhyme requires 
rang. Cf. too sprung (vn. 58, vill. 46). 

surcease, vi. 258, 'to cease, stop '; cf. 6". A. 404, and Shakespeare, 
Liter ece, 1766, " If they surcease to be that should survive." Origi- 
nally a surcease, O. Fr. sursis (for the noun, cf. Macbeth, I. 7. 4), was 
the arrest or stoppage of a legal suit. O. Fr. surseior, ' to pause.' 



720 PARADISE LOST. 

Syrtis, n. 939, Gk. Sifyms, the name of certain quicksands and sand- 
banks off the coast of N. Africa ; the word came to mean any quicksand 
or sandbank as here. 

take ; a common Elizabethan sense was ' to enchant, captivate,' 
especially by supernatural influence; cf. Hamlet, i. i. 163. Hence 
the general meaning 'to charm' (n. 554); cf. Bacon, Of Masques, 
4 'things... such as do naturally take the sense." So in Tennyson's 
Dying Swan, 1 1 1 : 

"The wild swan's death-hymn took the soul 
Of that waste place with joy." 

targe, IX. mi, 'a shield'; cf. Antony and Cleopatra, II. 6. 39, 
"targes undinted," i.e. not battered by blows. Of course, target is 
a diminutive of targe and formerly was used =' shield ' ; cf. Coriolanus, 
iv. 5. 126; Hamlet, ii. 2. 334. A mark to fire at is called 'a target' 
from its resemblance to a round shield. 

ted, ix. 450, 'to spread mown grass'; a Scandinavian word. Cf. 
Euphues : " When wealth cometh into the hands of youth before they 
can use it, then fall they to all disorder that may be, tedding that with 
a fork in one year which was not gathered together with a rake in 
twenty" (Bond's Lyly, II. pp. 15, 16). So in Lyly's (?) prose-piece 
Pap with a Hatchet : '' What fool more covetous than he that seeks to 
ted abroad the Church's goods with a fork, or scratch it to himself 
with a rake?" (Bond, ill. 412). 

thrall, i. 149, x. 402 ; enthrall, n. 551 ; from Icelandic >rcell, 
'a serf,' Danish tral no doubt, thrall came into England through 
the Danes. Strictly it meant ' a runner,' i.e. on messages, the original 
root being that seen in Gk. T>^X CIJ > ' to nin.' 

thwart, iv. 557, 'to cross'; as a verb now only figurative =' to 
hinder,' but then used also in the literal sense ' to pass across ' as here; 
cf. Pericles, IV. 4. 10. Minsheu has, " Traverser. To thwart, or goe 
overthwart, crosse or passe over." The etymological sense is seen in 
Milton's use of the adjective (x. 1075). 

tiar, in. 625, 'a crown'; strictly 'a wreathed ornament for the head' 
(such as the Persians wore). Gk. ndpa (or ndpaj) is a Persian word, 
perhaps from Persian tdjwar, ' crowned ' ; hence Lat. tiara, Fr. tiare. 
Tennyson speaks of flowers "studded white with disks and tiars" 
(Arabian Nights}. 

tine, X. 1075, 'to kindle'; cf. The Faerie Queenc, ill. 10. 13, 
"To quench the flames which she had tyn'd before," and Fletcher's 
Apollyonists : 

" Oil ! why should earthly lights then scorn to tine 

Their lamps alone at that first sunne divine." 
An obsolete verb, also spelt tind ; cf. tinder. The Dialect Diet, shows 



GLOSSARY. 721 

that the word survives in several forms, e.g. tindle, 'a bonfire ' (Derby- 
shire), teening-time, 'lighting-up time' (Cornwall), candle-teening (or 
fining), ( dusk.' 

tinsel, IX. 36 ; a shining, silver-like cloth. M. renders the Homeric 
epithet for the goddess Thetis, dpyvpdTrefa, ' silver-footed,' by ' tinsel- 
slippered,' Comus, 877. Fr. etincelle, Lat. scintilla, 'a spark.' 

tire, vi. 605 ; the old form of tier; cf. The Faerie Queene, I. 4. 35. 
It seems to have been specially used of a line of cannon ; Skeat quotes 
Florio (1598), "a tyre of ordinance." From Fr. tirer, 'to draw.' 

touch, iv. 686 ; often applied thus to the action of the hand on 
a musical instrument. Cf. The Passionate Pilgrim > 107, 108: 

" whose heavenly touch 
Upon the lute doth ravish human sense." 

trains, xi. 624; cf. S. A. 533, "venereal trains " = snares of love, 
and Cormts, 151. Shakespeare has the noun once (Macbeth, iv. 3. 118), 
the verb several times, e.g. in i Henry IV. v. i. 21. From Fr. trainer 
trahere, which in Late Lat. = 'to betray' : the metaphor (says Du Cange) 
of alluring birds into snares. Cf. the Animadversions, "he. ..trains on 
the easy Christian insensibly within the close ambushment of worst 
errors," P. W. ill. 43. 

trepidation, in. 483; Lat. trepidatio, 'a trembling,' from trepidare, 
'to tremble.' For the literal use of the word, cf. Bacon, The Advance- 
ment of Learning, bk. 11. 2. 8: "As it cometh to pass in massive bodies, 
that they have certain trepidations and waverings before they fix and 
settle, so it seemeth that by the providence of God this monarchy, before 
it was to settle in your majesty and your generations (in which I hope 
it is now established for ever), it had these prelusive changes and 
varieties." 

triumph, xi. 723, "a public festivity or exhibition of any kind," 
Schmidt, Lexicon', cf. A Midsummer- Nighfs Dream, I. i. 19, "With 
pomp, with triumph and with revelling." So often in Bacon, e.g. in 
his History of Henry VII. p. 98 (" he kept great triumphs of jousting 
and tourney"), p. 187, and p. 219, Pitt Press ed. See I? Allegro t 120. 
In this sense the word is usually plural. Lat. triumphus Ga. dplapfios, 
a hymn to Bacchus. 

troll, xi. 620, 'to roll'; still used in its literal sense in many counties, 
e.g. to troll a ball or hoop or wheel. In Yorkshire *7V0-egg-day' was 
an old name for Easter-Monday and Shrove-Tuesday, because on those 
days children played with hard-boiled, dyed eggs, rolling them on the 
grass. 

uncouth, ii. 407, 827; A.S. uncuft, 'unknown' from un, 'not' 
+ cttf$, the p.p. of cunnan, 'to know.' In M. it means 'strange, un- 

P. L. 46 



722 PARADISE LOST. 

familiar,' perhaps with the implied notion ' unpleasant'; cf. V. 98, VI. 
362. So in Titus Andronicns, n. 3. 211, "I am surprised with an 
uncouth fear," and As You Like , n. 6. 6. 

unenvled, II. 23. Elizabethan writers constantly treat the termi- 
nation -ed, which belongs to the passive participle, as equal to the 
adjectival ending -able; especially with words which have the negative 
prefix -, and the sense 'that may not be.' Cf. II. 337, 903. So 
" unvalued " = ' invaluable,' " unavoided " = ' inevitable,' Richard III. 
I. 4. 27, IV. 4. 217. The use of the participial and adjectival endings 
was less regular then than now. 

unweeting, x. 335, 916. M. always uses this form, never unwitting; 
the ee represents the sound of the long  in A.S. wttan, ' to know,' 
which comes from the same root as Gk. olda and ISelv and Lat. videre. 

utter, i. 72, ill. 16, V. 614; the comparative of A.S. #, 'out,' 
and an older form of outer. Lawyers still speak of " the utter bar" in 
contrast with "the inner bar." Cf. Blount's Glossographia (1656): 
"The outward or Utter Barristers... these always plead without [i.e. 
outside] the Bar." In Ezekiel x. 5 the Bible used to read "utter 
court." 

vans, n. 927, 'wings'; Ital. vanni, from Lat. vannus, 'a winnowing- 
fan." 1 Cf. P. R. iv. 583, "plumy vans" (said of angels' wings), and 
Tennyson's Love and Death, "Love wept and spread his sheeny vans 
for flight." For van=fan cf. vat = fat as in ' wine^a.' The Manipuhis 
Vocabulorum (1570) gives an old verb "to vanne, vannarc? i.e. 'to 
winnow.' 

virtue; often (vn. 236, vin. 95, ix. no, 145, 616, 649) used by M. 
in the sense 'efficacy, might' ; cf. Luke viii. 46, "virtue is gone out of 
me": hence virtuous= 'full of efficacy' (ix. 795, 1033). Also = ' courage ' 
(i. 320, X. 372), i.e. what a man (vir) should specially be, viz. 'brave'; 
Lat. virtus, 'worth, manly excellence, valour' (Lat. vir, ' man '). This 
etymological use is well illustrated in the Life of Coriolanus in North's 
Plutarch : "Now in those days valiantness was honoured in Rome above 
all other virtues: which they call virtus, by the name of virtue itself, 
as including in that general name all other special virtues besides. So 
that virtus in the Latin was as much as valiantness. " 

vouchsafe, n. 332, vii. 80, vin. 8. Spelt voutsafe in the original 
editions, and perhaps we ought to keep the form, as some editors do. 
M. may have wished to avoid the awkward sound ch before s, just as 
in proper names he avoids sh. 

waft, ii. 1042 ; often used (as here) by Elizabethan writers with the 
sense ' to journey, or carry, over water.' Cf. 2 Henry VI. iv. r. 114, 
" I charge thee waft me safely cross the Channel "; and P. R. i. 104. 



GLOSSARY. 723 

wanton. The word means literally 'unrestrained ' ; hence 'luxuriant,' 
as used of growth, IX. 211. Cf. A Midsummer- Night's Dream, n. i. 
99, 100: 

"And the quaint mazes in the wanton green 

For lack of tread are undistinguishable." 

Of motion it implies ' tossing about,' e.g. like the ' undulating ' coils 
of a serpent (ix. 517). 

warp, I. 341 ; a nautical term (Scandinavian) = " to move into some 
desired place or position by hauling on a rope or warp which has been 
fastened to something fixed, as a buoy, anchor, or other ship at or near 
that place or position : as, to warp a ship into harbor or to her berth " 
(Century Diet.}. M. uses it to describe 'undulatory forward motion,' 
and Thomson imitates him ; cf. Spring : 

"Myriads on myriads, insect armies warp 

Keen in the poisoned breeze." 
In either case comparison with a sailing ship is implied. 

weed, 'a garment'; A.S. weed, 'a garment, dress.' Quite a Miltonic 
word; cf. L? Allegro, 119, 120: 

"Where throngs of knights and barons bold, 

In weeds of peace, high triumphs hold " ; 

which is an echo of Troilus and Cressida, in. 3. 239, "To see great 
Hector in his weeds of peace." So in Coimts, 16, 84, and 390 (" For 
who would rob a hermit of his weeds? "). The singular is rare, but cf. 
A Midsummcr-Nighfs Dream, 11. i. 255, 256: 

"And there the snake throws her enamell'd skin, 

Weed wide enough to wrap a fairy in." 

Now a poetical or dialect (e.g. Scottish) usage, apart from the phrase 
"widow's weeds"; cf. Tennyson, In Mcmoriam, v. : 

"In words like weeds, I'll wrap me o'er." 

welkin, 'sky'; properly a plural word =' clouds '; cf. Germ, wolke, 
'a cloud.' The termination -in (for -en] is the plural ending which 
we get in brethren, children, oxen. M. uses welkin only twice (n. 538, 
Comus, 1015), and it was perhaps an affected word (Twelfth Night, 
in. i. 65). 

wignt, ii. 613, ' person, being' ; A.S. iviht, 'a creature.' It was 
rather an old-fashioned word of ballad-poetry; Shakespeare seems to 
ridicule it, putting it in the mouth of the bombastic Pistol; cf. The 
Merry Wives of Windsor, I. 3. 23, Henry V. II. i. 64. 

won, vn. 457, 'dwell'; cf. The Faerie Queene, n. 7. 49, "The 
fairest wight that wonneth under skie." From A.S. wiinian, which 
meant (i) 'to dwell,' (2) 'to be accustomed'; now obsolete except in 
the second sense and in the past participle wont or wonted. Similarly 

46 2 



724 PARADISE LOST. 

the cognate Germ. wohnen-=(i] 'to dwell,' (2) 'to be wont.' M. uses 
wont, in the second sense 'to be accustomed,' as a present tense and a 
preterite; though I. 764 and the Nativity Ode, 10, seem the only un- 
doubted cases of the latter. 

wreak, iv. u, 'to avenge.' This was the original sense of wreak 
(cognate with Germ, rdcken, 'to avenge'). The Manipulus Vocabulorum 
(1570) has "to wreake, vlcisci, vindicare" Cf. Tennyson, Gareth and 
Lynette, "Kill the foul thief, and wreak me for my son." The first 
two editions of P. L. have wreck, which is practically another form of 
wreak. 

yeanling, in. 434, 'just born.' "The difference between ean and 
yean is easily explained ; in the latter, the prefixed y- represents the 
very common A.S. prefix ge-, readily added to any verb without affecting 
the sense " (Skeat). Hence ean = A.S. ednian : yean = A. S. ge-ednian 
both meaning 'to bring forth young, ''i.e. of any kind ; but now ean or 
yean is commonly used of sheep. Shakespeare uses eanling=* young 
lamb,' in The Merchant of Venice, I. 3. 80. 



I. INDEX OF WORDS, PHRASES AND 
PROPER NAMES IN THE NOTES. 



Some of the words will also be found in the Glossary. 



a ( = one) 545 

a chance but 464 

a world of 563 

Abassin 461 

Abbana 388 

Abdiel 506 

abhorred 419 

abide 454 

abject 381 

abominations 383 

abortive 410, 442 

abrupt (n.) 409 

absolute 558, 560 

absolved 534 

abstract ( = abstracted) 558 

abused 388 

Abyss 537 

Accaron 387 

accomplished 467 

accord (vb) 411 

accountable 590 

Acheron 414 

act of grace 454 

actual (sin) 605 

Adam 488 

adamantine chains 371 

add 541 

Ades 426 

adhere 559 

admiration 437, 533, 584 

admire 395, 420, 550 

admit 562 

Adonis 574 

adorn (p. p.) 560 

Adramelech 517 



adust 520, 657 

advance 390, 454, 483, 499, 657 

Adversary (Satan) 514, 585 

advise 409 

advised 524 

aery gait 465 

aery tour 620 

^Etna flames 442 

Afer 608 

affable 533 

affect 435, 504, 519, 643 

afflict 375, 404, 472 

aftront 383 

after his charge received 484 

after summons read 400 

against 471, 536 

Agra 625 

Aladule 600 

alarmed 473 

Alcairo 396 

alchymy 412 

Alcides 412 

Alcinous 489, 575 

Aleian 530 

all but less than 377 

all-bearing mother (Earth) 489 

Almansor 628 

aloof ( = aloof from) 446 

Alp 416 

alternate (vb) 501 

amain 404 

Amara 461 

amarant (amaranth) 438, 617 

amazed 378 

Amazonian targe 588 



,--6 



INF 



I* 



vonfa 505 

47> 

ambrosial 406, 434, 500 
amerced of 394 
fcfeb ^o. 5>4 

IMBlba] ><':"."' :~o 

MI turn EM al :- rial ^c 

Mfiltfaai .c: 
Amnun's son (Moses) 381 



an hcst 504 
Anarch 4*7 
anarchy 59$ 
Angchc guards 590 



Angeb food 491, 500 
Angola 6t 7 



answerable $64! 656 
antarctic 569 
fcaaai |fi 

Aonian mount 369 

apathy 413 
Apocalypse 451 



apparent 4^ 591 

apply 459 
fpntoam 557 
approve 573, 589 
Araby the Blest 456 
arbitress 399 
arbomus roof 479 
Aicadian pipe 618 
architraTe 396 

A:-i,-u:> *S* 
arced 473 
A^estes6o8 
Aigo 4x7 



argue 406* 471, 649 



,:< 

Arimaspi 4 16 

A , < 



annoury 465, 515, 536 

Arr. :: .;-.; 

A: a .^ x * 

arrive 409 

as (=that) 488 

as in 588, 613 

as the sound of waters 507, 606 

M ^M m 

Ionia* ;>: 

^oend&g stale 463 
ask 466 
Asmadai 517 
Asmodeus 456 

aaftsfeg* 

^S M 

asphaltus 39^ 
assay 394, 434 



410^ 517 



5*4 

A^N: - 

SSSlf! 

Astoreth _ 

at large 440 
at once 5%*, 545 
at wwst 403 
Atababpa6i8 
Atlantean 407 

Atlas Mountains 627 
atrophy 6*0 
attend 436; 450, 543 
ttn^M wrtii 55: 
taAtel 55-- 5'- 
attnte 614 
Auran (Hauran) 457 
Auroral fan 476 
Ausooian land 397 
aathentk 450^ 46^ 

""^ 4 ****> 594 
auxtliar gods 391 



(Niphales) 



390 

45 

-. * .:>- 

Baabju 385 
Babel 



INDEX. 



727 



Bactrian 600 

baleful 371, 414 

balm 459, 580 

balmy reed 477 

bane 395 

barbaric gold 401 

barbed with lire 521 

Barca 424 

barricadoed 555 

Basan 383 

bases 565 

bate 640 

battles (armies) 513 

beads 444 

beam (of a spear) 510 

beam (of scales) 475 

Beelzebub 372, 407 

Beersaba 445 

before the Lord 643 

begirt with 393 

Behemoth 545 

Belial 388389, 403 

belike 404 

Bellona 424 

Belus 396 

beneath (south of) 382 

Bengala 417 

beryl 5:5 

beseeching or besieging 506 

better part 394 

bickering 526 

bind Hermes 447 

bird of Jove 620 

bird (of Paradise) 366 

birth 580 

bituminous 642 

Bizance 626 

black (friars) 443 

blanc 606 

bland 476 

blasphemed 435 

blasphemous 506, 517 

blasted heath 394 

blessed vision 500 

bloom (trans, vb) 458 

blow (vb) 476 

blowing 580 

bold emprise 635 

boon 459, 583 

Boreas 608 



Bosporus 427 

bossy sculptures 396 

both 468 

bottom ( = valley) 540 

bottom ( = vessel) 637 

bottomless pit 527 

bound... bound 457 

bo wing... bo wed 386 

braided train 462 

brand 658 

brazen 546 

brazen dungeon (of the winds) 608 

breadth 446 

breathe elixir 448 

Briareos 375 

bridging 597 

brigad 394, 412 

bright (n.) 552 

brinded 545 

broad herds 545 

broils 422, 514 

brown 588 

bulls (Papal) 444 

bullion-dross 395 

bushing 574 

Busiris 381 

but ( = that not) 402 

buxom air 422, 485 

by occasion 585 

by this 590 

Caecias 608 

Calabria 419 

calved 545 

Cambaluc 625 

can 623 

canopy of Night 445 

cany waggons (of the Chinese) 

440, 441 

Cape (of Good Hope) 418 
capital 652 
caravan 544 
career 398 
careering 525 
careful 473 
Carmel 645 
Casbeen 600 
Casius (Mt) 415 
Caspian 421 
cassia 488 



728 



INDEX. 



cataract 404, 638 

Cathaian coast 596 

Cathay 625 

causey 599 

cedar-top 543 

celestial patroness 564 

cell of fancy 558 

Celtic 390 

centre 395, 446, 513 

centric 551, 607 

cerastes 602 

Cerberean 419 

Ceres 473, 574 

certain to 585 

champain head 454, 508 

champion 398 

change for 377 

change with 472 

Chaos 369, 423 

charge (n.) 449, 590 

charioter 518 

charity 436, 469 

charm (=song) 466 

charmed 618 

charming 549 

Charybdis 427 

cheer 520 

Chemos 384 

Chersonese 626 

Cherubic fires 519 

Cherubim 511, 618 

Chimaera 417 

Chineses 441 

chivalry 381 

choice 410 

choice regard 445 

choice to chouse 488 

chrysolite 447 

cieling 637 

Circe 578 

circling 445, 541 

circumscribe 537 

cited 437 

clang 543, 639 

clarion 390 

Cleombrotus 442 

climate 566 

clime 376, 414, 476, 531, 636 

close (adj.) 411 

cloud (of soldiers) 52 1 



cloudy van 511 

clung 602 

coast (n.) 452, 568, 591 

coast (vb) 470 

Cocytus 414 

combustion 371, 513 

comet 657 

communion 500 

compact of 580 

compare (n.) 494, 571 

compasses 537 

complacence 437 

complete to 590 

compliant 462 

complicated 602 

compose 407 

composure 522 

compute days 447 

concave 391, 417 

conclave 399 

concoct 492, 520 

confer 398 

confine with 426 

confound 409, 606 

Confusion 643 

conglobed 538 

Congo 627 

conjured 421 

conniving 605 

conscience 559 

conscious Night 521 

consequence 599 

considerate 394 

consist 505 

consistence 425 

consorted 533 

conspicuous 533 

consult (n.) 400 

contest (n.) 472, 511, 589, 638 

contracted brow 560 

contrite 617 

converse (n.) 572 

converse (vb) 405, 530, 557 

convex 410, 440, 540 

conviction 591 

cope 382, 474, 513 

cormorant 457 

corner 606 

cornice 396 

corny reed 541 



INDEX. 



729 



correspond with 547 

couched with 454 

counterview 594 

court-amours 469 

covered field 398 

coy 462 

craze 647 

cresset 396 

crew 388 

crisped brooks 458 

Cronian sea 595 

crowned (with wine) 493 

crude 520 

cry ( = pack) 419 

crystal sluice 479 

crystal wall 540 

crystalline 443, 526, 540 

cubic 518 

curious knots 459 

Cusco 628 

Cyclades 485 

Cyrene 424 

Dagon 387 

Dalilah 587 

Damascus 388 

damasked 462 

Damiata 415 

damp 390, 623 

Danaw (Doriau) 382 

dance (n. and vb)4i9, 482, 491, 569 

Danite 587 

dank (n.) 544 

Darien 569 

dark (n. ) 432 

dark with excessive bright 439 

darkness (of Hell or Chaos) 430, 

467. 537 

darkness (Milton's blindness) 531 
darkness visible 372 
dart (of Death) 420, 630 
dash (vb) 403 
daughter of his voice 581 
dawning hills 521 
day without night 480 
day-spring 479 
dead in sins 436 
dearest 436 

Death, see Sin and Death 
death like sleep 653 



Decan 589 

deceive 410 

decencies 561 

decent 449 

decline 644 

deep (n.) 402, 447, 520 

defend 617, 647 

deform 421, 631 

deformed 518 

degree of reason 579 

degrees (steps) 444 

Delia 573 

Delos 485, 596 

Delphian cliff 390 

Demogorgon 426 

denounce 618 

dense, or rare 425 

deny 647 

deprave 512 

derived 591 

descant 466 

descent ( = descendants) 613 

despaired (passive) 394, 520 

determine 408, 514, 621 

Deucalion and Pyrrha 615, 616 

devious 444 

devote (devoted) 435, 585, 638 

devoted 507 

dews (of sleep) 501 

diamond 517 

Dictsean 605 

dilated 386, 473 

dim suffusion 430 

dimensionless 616 

dipsas 602 

dire hail 414 

disastrous 393 

disburden 610 

disclosed 543 

discontinuous wound 515 

discourse (reason) 495 

discover 396, 445, 622 

dishonest 462 

dismal 372 

dismal hiss of... darts 513 

disparted 538 

dispenses (n.) 444 

displayed 543 

displode 523 

dispossess 641 



730 



INDEX. 



dissipation 522 
distemper 540 
divan 60 i 

divide the night 467 
dividual 543 
divine of 584 
divinely 559 
Dodona 390 
dogs of Hell 605 
doing or suffering 374, 405 
dole 472 
dolphin 543 
Dominations 439 
doom 437 599,' 602 
Dorian mood 391 
Doric land 390 

double-founted stream (the Jor- 
dan) 646 
doubt 569 
dove-like 370 

down (adv. used as vb) 571 
Dragon 452, 603 
draw air 530, 556 
dread 384 
drench 402 
drop serene 430 
dropt with gold 543 
drossiest 493 
drouth 533 
drugged 603 
Dryad 573 
dulcimer 548 
durance 472 

each... their 479, 545, 640 

Earth's green Cape 562 

Earth-born 375 

earthly 587 

earthly notion 536 

earthy 570 

eastern gate of Paradise 620, 657 

eat ( = ate) 583 

Ecbatana 626 

eccentric 446, 500, 551 

eclipse (n. and vb) 393, 620 

ecliptic 452 

Eden, 368, 453, 454, 455, 458, 

533 568, 573. 624 
edge of battle 378, 511 
edict 505 



effectual might 435 

El Dorado 628 

Eleale 385 

elect Angels 434, 518 

elegant 586 

element ( = sky) 411 

elements (the four) 407, 483 

elixir 448 

ellops 602 

Elysian flowers 438 

embalmed 422 

embattled 541 

emblazed 391, 499 

emblazonry 411 

emblem 467 

embodied 391 

embosomed 499 

emboss 647 

embowelled 522 

embower 380 

embryo, embryon 424, 442, 540 

emmet 545 

Empedocles 442 

empiric 493 

emprise 635 

empyreal 450, 599 

Empyrean 433 

enamelled 578 

end ( = object, purpose) 463, 533, 

54 6 57 2 

engines 397, 424, 520 
enlarged 385 
enormous 390, 488 
enter and possess 605 
entertain 412 
entire 572 
enviest 559 
envy 464, 571 
epicycle 551 
equal 610 
equal to God 437 
equal with gods 464 
equinoctial winds 417 
Ercoco 626 
erect 461, 631 
erected 394 
eremites 442 
err not that 514 
erroneous 531 
error 459, 541 



INDEX. 



731 



essence 374, 386, 405, 4 io, 570 

essential 402 

esteem of wise 472 

Estotiland 607 

eternal Wisdom 530 

eternize 518, 6t6 

ethereal 371, 539 

Ethiop line 461 

Ethiopian (sea) 417, 418 

Euboic sea 413 

euphrasy 629 

Eurus 609 

Eurynome 604 

Eve 464, 619 

even (n.) 465 

event 394, 402, 468, 504, 572 

ever-during 537 

every... each 382 

evil tongues 531 

evince 649 

exact 545 

excess 618 

exercise 402 

exhale 500, 539 

exile 394 

exorbitant 435 

expatiate 398 

experience 584 

explode 603, 636 

express 547 

expressed immutable 589 

extenuate 606 

extinct 374 

eye (of plumage) 545 

eye ( = the sun) 481 

eyry 543 

fable 375, 392, 616 
face of things 549 
facile gates 473 
fact 403, 585630 
fair (n.) 579, 637 
fairest of stars 481 
faltering measure 584 
fame 394, 409, 472 
famine 422 
fan ( = wing) 485 
fancy 479, 556 
fast by 369 
fatal 403 



fatal bruise 593 

fatal course 506 

fate 374 

fathom 424, 425 

fealty 557 

feared (=to be feared) 582 

feathered cincture 589 

Feature 595 

feigned 467, 565 

fellow-servant 555 

fellows of 394 

female light (of the moon) 554 

fennel 579 

fervid wheels 537 

Fesole 379 

fetch day 553 

Fez 627 

field 373, 398, 407 

fierce as a comet 657 

fiercest (used as noun) 472 

fig-tree 588 

files 391, 470, 516 

Filial Godhead 536 

fire and horror 402 

firmament 404, 539, 540 

first convex 440 

first of things (light) 539 

five (planets) 481 

fixed (stars) 443, 481, 606 

fixed mind 373 

flaming Cherubim 511, 570 

flaming mount 499 

flat 404 

flatly 506 

flaw ( = gust of wind) 608 

fledge (fledged) 449, 543 

fleecy star 445 

flight 369, 530 

float 544 

flood 417, 451 

Flora 476 

florid son 460 

flowing cups 493 

flown with insolence 389 

fluctuate 581 

fluid air 516 

foiled 561 

foment 614 

fond 442, 555 

Fontarabbia 393 



732 



INDEX. 



for ( = because of, instead of) 463, 

57.6, 586 
forfeit 435 
forgetful lake 402 
forlorn 463 
forlorn of 613 
fortify 599 
foughten field 519 
found ( = build) 538, 594 
found ( = melt) 395 
fount 458 
fragrance 556 

frame (n.) 424, 439, 480, 550 
frame (vb) 479, 494 
fraud 384, 535. 5^7, 5! 
free will 590 

freedom ( = free men) 512 
frequent 400, 546 
frequenting 615 
fret 548 

fretted gold 396 
friars 442 
frieze 396 
frith 424 

from (= after) 555, 558 
from thence 546 
from what... into what 496 
front 407, 461, 546, 572 
frore 415 

fruitless... fruit 581 
fugue 633 
full of pomp 382 
fume 555, 586 
fuming 476 
furniture 565 
fusil 633 

Gabriel 464, 509 
Galaxy 547 
gales 455, 559 
Galileo 378, 484, 549 
gan blow 510 
Ganges 440 
garden of bliss 556 
gave to rule 397, 624 

gay 473 

Gaza 387 

gaze (trans, vb) 448, 486 

Gehenna 384 

gemmed 541 



general ancestor 466 

generation 534 

genial 467, 540, 561 

Geryon's sons 628 

Giant-angels 548 

girt 536 

give us only good 483 

given me to possess 436 

giving to 437 

glimmering 428, 440 

glistering 445, 552 

globe 411, 607 

gloss 493 

gloze 434, 578 

glut 522 

Goblin 421 

god 374, 438, 478 

golden chain 428 

golden compasses 537 

golden scales of the Eternal 474 

gonfalon 499 

good 562 

goodly frame 550 

Gordian twine 462 

gorgeous East 400 

Gorgon 416 

Gorgonian 596 

gourd 488 

grace ( = pardon) 454 

graces ( = favours) 450 

Graces 460 

grain of Sarra 621 

grand ( = first) 371 

grand ( = great) 374 

Grand ( = great ones) 600 

great (n.) 552 

great river 638 

great things by small 514 

great year (Plato's) 498 

grey 648 

grey (friars) 443 

griding 515 

gripe 463, 521, 622 

growth 569 

gninsel 387 

gryphon 425 

Guiana 628 

g ulf 433 

Gulf (Persian) 638 

gum 459 



INDEX. 



733 



gust 603 

habit 449 

habitable 554 

had in remembrance 450 

hair 541 

haled 416 

half-rounding guards 471 

halleluiah 549 

happy isle 410 

happy isles 446 

harald 397, 412, 636 

Haran 644, 645 

harbour 572 

harp (of Orpheus) 533 

harpy-fooled 416 

havoc 605 

head 464, 576, 589 

head ( = source) 461 

healing words 572 

hear'st thou rather 430 

heaved 376 

Heaven, Heavens ( = sky) 369, 
427, 451, 497, 533, 550 

Heaven ( = the Empyrean) 427 

Heaven and Earth ( = the classi- 
cal deities, Uranus and Ge) 390 

Heaven and Earth ( = the World) 
605 

heavenly love 561 

Heavenly Muse 368, 430 

heinous 590 

Hell's concave 391 

Hell-born 420 

helm 391 

hemisphere 539 

her ( = its) 491 

Hermes 447, 448, 487 

Ilermione 577 

heroic race 392 

Hesebon 384 

Hesperian 459 

Hesperus 481, 534, 559 

hierarch 494, 499, 621 

high disdain 373 

high mount of God 500 

high throne 600 

highth or depth 408 

him destroyed 570 

Hinnom 384 



his ( = its) 375, 552 

hold 428 

hollow (used quibblingly) 522 

holy mount 548 

homicide 385 

honour dishonourable 462 

hope ( = hope for) 406, 534 

hopeful 473 

homed 638 

horns ( = the "crescent" of the 

Turks) 600 
horrent 411 
horrid 391 

horrid hair (of a comet) 421 
horror chill 584 
hosting 511 
Hours 460 

house of woe (Hell) 528, 601 
however 472 
hull (vb) 639 
human face divine 432 
humane 582, 583 
humble 541 
humid bow 455 
hyacinthine 461 
hyaline 548 
Hydaspes 440 
Hydra 416 
hydrus 602 
Hymen 634 
hymensean 467 

Ida 390, 491 

idol 511 

if chance 411 

ignoble ease 405 

ignominy (scanned ignomy] 3 74,405 

Ilium 392 

illustrate 503 

illustrious 449 

Imaus 440 

im blazoned 565 

im bordered 574 

imbrowned 459 

imbrute 570 

impaired 501 

impaled 418 

imparadised 464 

impearl 504 

impediment 521 



734 



INDEX 



impenetrable to star 587 

impertinence 555 

implicit 541 

impotence 404 

impregn 464, 583 

impresses (n.) 565 

impurpled 439 

in ( = on) 465 

in act 581 

in bliss 499 

in counterview 594 

in degree 558 

in fact of arms 403 

in few (words) 592 

in himself collected 581 

in plain 583 

in pleasure 557 

in power 605 

in procinct 508 

in spirit 628 

in station 603 

in the air 478 

in the dark 448 

in their course 501 

in their triple degrees 504 

in utmost longitude 464 

in vain 442 

incarnate 570 

incense. ..fuming 548 

incentive reed (match) 521 

inclinable 583 

inclined 611 

incomposed 427 

incorporate 6 1 1 

incredible how swift 466 

incumbent 376 

Ind (India) 400 

indecent 523 

indented 576 

Indian fig 588 

Indian mount 399 

indirect 635 

individual 464, 500 

inducing 518 

indulgences 444 

inexorably 402 

infamed 583 

infant blood 419 

infantry 391 

infer 534 



informed 447 

inhabit lax 536 

inoffensive 490, 554, 597 

insensate 526 

insinuating 462 

inspired 488, 611 

instinct 425, 633 

Intelligence 554 

intend 410 

Intercessor 436, 592 

intercourse 594 

internal Man 582 

interpreter 533 

interrupt (p. p.) 434 

interval (of battle ) 511 

into what... from what 373 

intrenched 394 

inured 405 

inventions 534 

invest 376, 430, 542 

in visible... beheld visibly 524 

involved 376, 540 

inwards 630 

Iris 621 

iron... mould 522 

irreverent son (Ham) 644 

irriguous 459 

Isis 388 

Ispahan (Isfahan) 626 

Israel 649 

Ithuriel 470 

jaculation 523 

jangling noise 643 

Japhet 468 

jar not with 504 

Javan 389 

jointed armour 543 

Jordan 646 

Joshua 650 

jousted 393 

Jove, bird of, 620 

joy and tidings 598 

just ( = righteous) 536 

just array 603 

ken 371, 372 
kick the beam 475 
kind (n.) 543 
kindliest 489 



INDEX. 



735 



King of Glory 537 

kingly crown 420 

knots 459 

know to know no more 469 

knowledge within bounds 534 

Ksar 626 

labouring moon 420 

labouring ( = cultivating) 641 

Laertes 1 son 575 

Lahore 625 

laid ( = stilled) 375 

landskip 455 

Lapland witches 419 

lapsed 435, 603 

larboard 427 

last (=at last) 527 

last ( = worst) 587 

late (adv.) 640 

lateral 609 

lawn 459 

lazar-house 630 

lead on (a dance) 460 

least... last 437 

lee 376 

Lemnos 397 

leper (Naaman) 388 

Lethe 414 

Leucothea 619 

Levant 609 

levelled west 542 

Leviathan 376, 543 

levied ( = raised) 424 

levy war 411, 621 

lewd 457 

lewdly 512 

libbard 545 

Libecchio 609 

Libya 657 

Lien as 413 

lightening 503 

like a mist 571 

like a tower 393 

likest 573 

limber 545 

limbo 444, 616 

limitary 473 

lineaments 486, 545 

liquid fire 376 

liquid texture 516 



list (vb) 419, 470 

listed 639 

livery 466, 545 

living death 6n 

living God 644 

living sapphire 428, 466 

locks ( = foliage) 614 

long choosing and beginning late 

565 

long were to tell 60 1 
longitude 446, 464, 542 
loosely 544 
loquacious (Eve) 592 
lore 422 
lower stair 445 
Lucifer 481, 534, 535 
lute 480 
luxury 636 

mace 596 

Mseonides 432 

Magellan 607 

magnanimous 547 

magnificence 407 

Maia's son 487 

mail 487, 517 

main ( = land) 524 

main ( = sea) 594 

male light (of the sun) 554 

Mammon 394, 406 

mane 546 

manifold in sin 590 

manna 403 

mantling 544 

mantling vine 459 

manuring ( = cultivation) 466 

manuring ( = tending) 616 

marasmus 630 

marble air 446 

marish 657 

marie 379 

Marocco 627 

marshal 565 

mask (Masque) 395, 469, 487, 621 

mastery 424 

material mould 450 

maugre 436, 567 

me, me 436, 6n 

me miserable ! 454 

me... remains 566 



736 



INDEX. 



meagre 594 

meath 490 

Mediator 591 

Medusa 416, 602 

Megaera 603 

Melinda 626 

mellifluous dews 492 

Memnonian palace 597 

Memphian 381, 395 

mental sight 629 

Mercury 487 

mercy-seat 615 

mere serpent 574 

merit 437 

Michael 509, 617 

middle air 390 

middle darkness 430 

middle shore 489 

might of Gabriel 516 

milky 488 

mind (vb) 573 

minim 545 

ministering... minstrelsy 512 

mirror (the Moon) 542 

miserable of happy Cio 

Misery 563 

misrule 540 

mixed dance 469 

Mogul 625 

mole 597 

Moloch 383 

Mombaza 626 

moment 410, 513, 590 

Montezume 628 

mood 391 

moon-struck madness 630 

more pleasant 574 

more unexpert 401 

more wakeful than to 618 

morning planet 542 

mortal 368, 422, 435, 556 

mortal passage 624 

Moscow 626 

mother (Earth) 540 

mother of all mankind 491 

motion 404, 405 

motioned 571 

mould 403, 450, 463, 522, 542, 576 

mouth of Hell 642 

Mozambic 456 



much revolving 453 
Mulciber 397 
must ( = new wine) 490 
my mother's lap 611 
mysterious 561, 592 
mysteriously 444 

naphtha 396 

nard 487, 488 

narrow 569 

nathless 379 

native 387, 455, 622 

nativity 520 

Nature 423, 424 

Nebo 384 

necessity ("the tyrant's plea") 463 

nectar 492, 500 

nectarous 515 

need (vb) 438 

Negus 626 

neither... and 637 

nether ocean 549 

new part puts on 581 

nice 459, 492, 557 

nicest 522 

night comes not there 501 

night -foundered 376 

night-hag 419 

nightingale 477, 544 

nightly 431, 532, 564 

Nimrod 641, 642 

nine (a significant number) 371, 

48, 527 
Niphates 452 
Nisroch 519 
nitre 425 
nitrous 520 
no detriment 599 
no equal 513 
no more of talk 5^3 
nocturnal and diurnal rhomb 553 
none (emphatic by position) 467, 

496, 542, 634 
nor did they not 381 
nor more 475 
nor sometimes forget 431 
nor... wanted they 480 
nor wants 490 
north- wind 411 
Norumbe^a 608 



INDEX. 



737 



Norwegian pine 379 

not mystic 575 

not noxious 546 

not obvious 559 

not the lowest end 572 

not unconform to 484 

not unvisited 409 

not without 482, 583 

notion 536 

Notus 608 

numbered 513, 550 

numberless 552 

numbers (measures) 432, 447 

numerous 480 

nursery 550 

O for 452 

Ob 568 

obdurate 371 

obdured 414 

obey to 381 

object (vb) 472 

oblige 585 

oblivious pool 378 

obnoxious 571 

obscene 384 

obscure 403 

obscure (n.) 409 

obsequious 508 

observed 393, 600 

obtain 445 

obvious 510, 559, 592, 624 . 

Ocean Isles 463 

ocean-stream 376 

odds 464, 584, 599 

CEchalia 413 

o'erwatched 407 

of (=after) 455, 579, 610, 616, 646 

of force 374 

of future 519 

of grace 614 

of incorrupt 616 

of late 589 

of mute 579 

of the first 501 

of us... determine 621 

offend 375, 519 

officiate 550 

officious 552, 569 

old 530 



Olympian hill 529 

Olympias 577 

Olympus 390 

omnific 537 

on fret 548 

on smooth (sea) 543 

on this side 644 

one (emphatic) 464 

one root (Adam) 409 

opacous 440, 550 

operation 556 

Ophion 604 

Ophir 627 

Ophiuchus 421 

Ophiusa 603 

opiate rod 619 

Ops 605 

optic glass 378 

optic tube 447 

or... or 560, 572 

oracle 369 

orb 430, 466, 481, 499, 539> 5^9 

orb in orb 551 

orbed 521 

orbicular 451, 599 

ore 639 

Orcus 426 

order from disorder 450 

Orders of Heavenly beings 499 

Oread 573 

Oreb 368, 369, 617 

organ 548 

orgies 385 

orient 391, 476 

original (n.) 409, 570 

original (sin) 586 

Orion 380 

orisons 480 

Ormus 400 

Orus 388 

Osiris 388 

other... other 454, 612 

other self 558, 592 

other suns 554 

ought... admire 551 

ounce 462, 545 

our general ancestor (Adam) 466 

owe 589 

pain 371 



P. L. 



47 



738 



INDEX. 



painted wings 544 

pale (n.) 454 

Pales 573 

palm-tree 555 

palpable darkness 647 

palpable obscure 409 

pampered boughs 483 

Pan 459 

Pandemonium 307, 599 

Pandora 467, 460 

Paneas 445 

Panim 398 

panoply 525 

Paquin 625 

Paradise 454, 455, 458, 568 

Paradise of Fools 441, 444, 616 

paragoned 599, 600 

paramount 411 

parch 415, 657 

pardons 444 

parle 514 

parsimonious (ant) 545 

part (in music) 439 

part (stage-term) 592 

partial 413 

participate 557 

pass 591 

passed 436 

passion 394, 454 

pastoral reed 618 

paths indirect 635 

patron 436, 473 

pavilion 426, 501 

pavilioned 621 

peace is despaired 394 

peal (of the last trumpet) 437 

pearly grain 492 

peculiar (n.) 542 

peculiar nation 644 

peer 371 

peerage 393 

Pegasus 530 

Pelorus 376 

pendent by subtle magic 396 

pendent world 429 

pendulous 474 

pennon 424, 544 

Peor 385 

perfidious 381 

period (end) 654 



permissive 60 1 

permit to Heaven 632 

pernicious 378, 521 

perplexed 457 

persevere 549, 562 

persisting 435 

person 592 

pervert 457 

Petsora 595 

phalanx 473 

philosopher 447 

Phineus 432 

Phlegethon 414 

Phlegra 392 

phoenix 485 

phrenzy 630 

pilaster 396 

pilot 376 

pine (trans, vb) 464, 630, 643 

pioner 394 

pitchy cloud of locusts 381 

place or refuge 569 

plain (flat) 556 

planet 547, 551 

plat (plot) 576 

platane 464 

plate 517 

pledge 422 

Pleiades 542 

points (laces) 366 

poise 424 

pole 418, 531 

Pomona 491, 573 

pomp 547, 550 

ponder 475 

pontifical 597 

Pontus 489 

port (=bearing) 472, 615 

port (=gate) 470 

ported spears 473 

possess 464, 505, 605 

poured 536 

powdered with stars 547 

powers 375 

pravity 649 

precede 605 

precious bane 395 

precious things (stones, metals) 

448 
prescript 648 



INDEX. 



739 



pretence 422, 519 

pretend 366 

pretended to 612 

pretending... commanded 504 

prevenient grace 615 

prevent 411, 613 

prevention 511 

prime ( = chief) 389, 410, 449, 466 

prime ( = daybreak) 476 

prime orb 466 

Prince of air 653 

Prince of Darkness 599 

Princedoms 437 

process 536 

procinct 508 

prodigious 416, 636 

proem 578 

proffer 410 

profluent stream 653 

progeny of light 499 

prone 558 

proof 491 

proper 402, 496 

prophecy ( = prophets) 650 

Proserpin, Proserpina 460, 574 

prostrate 527 

Proteus 448 

provision 580 

public reason 463 

punctual 550 

Punic coast 489 

purchase 604 

purged 538, 629 

purlieu 422, 463 

purple (vb) 532 

purple ( = lustrous) 469 

purpose 462, 556 

pursue 370, 406 

put to try 472 

pygmean race 399 

Python 603 

quadrature 599 
quaternion 483 
quell 650 
quenched 430 
Quiloa 626 
quit 453 

Rabba 383 



races and games 565 

racking whirlwinds 404 

Ramiel 518 

rampant 545 

ramped 462 

ran purple 387 

ranged 412 

rank (n.) 455 

rank (trans, vb) 623 

Raphael 484 

rapt 444, 531 

rapture 533 

rare ( = here and there) 545 

rare 1 = seldom achieved) 430 

rare ( = thin) 425 

ravenous fowl 594 

realty 511 

rear (vb) 376 

reason 569 

rebel king (Jeroboam) 388 

recess 399 

recline ( = reclining) 462 

recollect 390, 576 

recommend 462 

recorder 391 

recure 652 

red right hand 404 

redound 423, 533, 610 

reduce 526, 600, 610 

regal ornament 486 

regard (n.) 445, 466 

regency 504 

region 446, 544, 617 

reign 391 

relation 496, 555 

religions 382 

reliques 444 

reluctance 408, 614 

reluctant 509, 602 

remiss 519, 557 

remorse 394, 497, 617 

rend 647 

renew (intrans. vb) 556 

repaired 469 

repealed 533 

repeat (n.) 515 

represent 479 

reptile 543 

resolve 550 

retained 579 



472 



740 



INDEX. 



retinue 490 

retire (n.) 622 

retorted 507 

returns him 472 

reverend sire (Noah) 637 

revolutions 416 

revolving 453 

Rhene 382 

Rhodope 532 

rhomb 553 

rib (Adam's) 558, 559, 612 

ribs of gold 395 

ride the air 412 

ridge 513 

right reason 509, 643 

rime 367 

Rimmon 388 

rined 490 

riot 602 

river-dragon 647 

river-horse 545 

road of Heaven 473 

robe of righteousness 594 

roll 509 

romance 393 

room 437 

root 581 

rosy hand of Morn 508 

rosy steps of Morn 475 

roving the field 579 

rubied nectar 500 

ruby 447 

rue (herb) 629 

ruin (n.) 371 

ruin (vb) 436 

ruining 527 

n 534, 542 

Sabaean 456 

Sabbath-evening 555 

sacred 431, 569, 571 

sacred and devote 435 

sad 479, 5*i 

sad demeanour meek 619 

safe 584 

safe arrive 435 

sagacious of 595 

saints 437, 442, 535, 647 

Samarchand 625 

Samoed shore 608 



Sam os 485 

Sanctities 433 

sanctity of reason 546 

sapphire fount 458 

sapphire throne 525 

Sarra 621 

Satan 372, 435, 501 

savage 457 

savour 586 

scale 495, 561 

scaled 445 

scales 474, 475 

Scales (sign of Zodiac) 474, 607 

scandal 385 

scathed 394 

science 582 

sciential 584 

scope 403 

Scorpion sign 474 

scribbled o'er 551 

scull 543 

Scylla 427 

scythe of Time 605 

sdeined 453 

seal (vb) 473 

seasons 466, 548, 607 

second Eve 491, 593 

seconded 598 

secret 368, 423 

secret cloud 590 

secretest 594 

sect 512 

secular power 654 

secure (adj.) 457, 484, 521, 573, 

620 

secure of 470 
securely 511 
sedentary Earth 550 
sedge 380 
select 638 
Seleucia 458 

self-balanced (Earth) 538 
self-opened (gate of Heaven) 484 
seneshal 566 
Senir 646 
Sennaar 442 
sense 569 
sensible (n.) 407 
sentence 401, 569 
senteries 410 



INDEX. 



741 



seraph 453, 507 

Seraphim 439 

Serapis 396 

Serbonis (lake of) 415 

serenate 469 

serpent ( = serpentine) 541 

Serraliona 609 

serried 391, 522 

servant of God 508 

servility ( = slaves) 512 

servitude ( = slaves) 645 

several 538 

sewer 566 

shade 594 

shadow 563 

shaggy hill 458, 523 

shallow 578 

Shame 586 

shape 471 

shared (cut) 515 

shattering 614 

shave 417 

shoaling 595 

shook his throne 373 

shroud 614 

shrub unfumed 490 

sideral 608 

Sidon 386 

sighs... mute 616 

sign (of the Zodiac) 474 

Siloa's brook 369 

Sin and Death 418, 420, 563, 594, 

597 

Sinsean 025 
Sinai 368, 369 
single imperfection 558 
sinister 612 
sinned thy sin 629 
Sirocco 609 
Sittim 385 
skill 560 

sky-tinctured grain 487 
Sleep (personified) 534 
slime 595, 597 
slip ( = let slip) 375 
sluiced 395 
small infantry (= the pygmies) 

3Qi 

smallest lineaments exact 545 
smooth 387 



smooth (n.) 543 

smooth sliding 556 

so (completing a simile) 422, 441, 

456, 54i 578, 595 
so dearly 437 
soar 369, 530 

sociable spirit (Raphael) 484 
Sofala 627 
soft-ebbing 541 
Soldan 398 

sole bird (the Phoenix) 486 
sole command 434 
sole propriety 469 
sole wonder 578 
solemn 544, 651 
solemn days 500 
solitude 532 
some say 604 
son of despite 571 
sons of Belial 389 
sons of God 494 
Sophi 600 
sord 629 
sort 557 
sottish 388 

soul ( = creatures) 543 
sound ( = strait) 416 
south-wind 637 
sovran 377 
sowed 476 
spares to 422 
speculation 656 
speed (vb) 590 
speed... spiritual 552 
sphere 551 
spinning 554 
spires 577 
Spirit of God 538 
spirited 451, 580 
spirit ous 520 
sport 444 

spots (in the moon) 492, 553 
spring (thicket) 571 
spun out 538 
squadroned 651 
squared regiment 397 
stabled 637 
star of evening 534 
starry 544 
starry 'sphere 439 



742 



INDEX. 



starve 416 

starved 469 

state ( = canopy) 600 

state ( = stately bearing) 487,622 

States 409 

station 410, 535, 547, 603, 656 

stay (for) 464 

steadfast Earth 424 

steering 598 

stemming 418 

still 592 

still erect 573 

still to seek 555 

stole (p. p.) 468 

stony (n.) 615 

stood (to pray) 468, 615 

stood at my head 556 

stood fixed 396 

stood for 510 

stooped 557, 620 

stop (musical) 548 

store 442, 488 

straitened 398 

strike ( = to blast) 599 

strook 404 

strucken 587 

study 373 

study household good 571 

stupendous 598 

Stygian flood 376 

Stygian pool 430 

style 408 

Styx 414 

subject (vb) 561 

subject for heroic song 565 

subjected 658 

subjection 5,60 

sublime 412, 433, 526, 543, 603 

sublimed 376, 495 

sublunar vault 470 

submiss 556 

suborned 573 

subscribed 619 

success 366, 401, 512 

successful hope 374 

succinct 449 

suffer... do 405 

suffice 374 

suggestion 434, 569 

Sultan 626 



sum of things 523 

summed their pens 543 

sung triumph 528 

sunk 568 

superstitions 654 

supplanted 602 

supreme 405 

surcharged 422 

Sus, Susa 597, 627 

suspend 524 

suspended 413 

suspense 522 

swage 391 

swelling gourd 541 

swim 586, 635 

sword of Michael 407, 513 

sword-law 636 

sylvan scene 455 

Sylvanus 467 

symphony 396, 439, 480, 634 

synod 409, 512, 616 

Syrtis 425 

tabernacle 501, 539 

talked 443 

Tantalus 416 

Tarsus 375 

Tartarean 402 

tartareous 538 

Tartarus 509 

Tauris 600 

Taurus 398 

tedded grass 576 

teemed 545 

Temir 625 

temper ( = a thing tempered) 378, 

470 

temper ( = temperament) 405 
temper (vb) 422 
temperate vapours bland 476 
tempering 530 
tempt 409 

tempted... attempt 394 
tendance 574 
tended 476 
tenfold adamant 513 
tents of wickedness 634 
tepid 543 
Ternate 417 
terrestrial mould 576 



INDEX. 



743 



texture 516 

Thammuz 386 

Thamyris 431 

that ( = so that) 422, 423 

that ( = the well-known) 399, 443, 

460 

that first moved 443 
that hill 625 
that shepherd 369 
that stone 447 

the great mother (Earth) 540 
the only sound 476 
the rest ( = for the rest) 581 
Thebes 392 

then... when 406, 452, 500 
there be who 511 
this habitable 554 
those ( = the well-known) 379 
thought not much 593 
Thracian 532 
Thrascias 608 
three different motions (of the 

Earth) 552 
thrice 394 
throned powers 374 
through all numbers absolute 558 
Thunderer 401 
thundering 383 
thus much 472 
thwart 465, 553, 614 
thy weaker (Eve) 529 
Thyestean 608 
tiar 449 
Tidore 417 
tilth 620 

tilting furniture 565 
timorous and slothful 403 
tinctured 487 
tine 614 

tinsel trappings 565 
tire 523 
Tiresias 432 
Titan 390 

to ( = agreeably to) 574 
to ( = to the best of) 408 
to admiration 584 
to death devote 585 
to do... rites 385 
to drowse charmed 618 
to me ( = in my opinion) 519 



to the ages 606 

to the shield 470 

to the spear 470 

Tobias 456, 484 

too long (to tell) 442 

too mean pretence 519 

too secure 620 

took 413 

took alarm 521 

top of speculation 656 

torturing hour 402 

tour 620 

towered structure high 396 

towering 486 

toy 586 

tragic (notes) 563 

training 522 

trains 635 

translated saints 442 

transmigration 594 

transverse 444, 633 

travelled steps 444 

traverse 391 

Tree of Life 457 

Tree of prohibition 581 

Tremisen 628 

trepidation talked 443 

triform 451 

Trinacria 419 

triple degrees 504 

triumph (n.) 636 

triumph (vb) 374 

triumphed ( = triumphed over) 603 

triumphing 438, 653 

triumphs ( = public shows) 637 

troll 634 

try 599 

tube 447 

tuft 541 

tun 471 

Turchestan-born 626 

turret (adj.) 578 

Tuscan artist 378 

twinned 643 

two-handed sword 513 

Typhcean 412 

Typhon 375, 376 

tyranny 374, 401 

unapparent Deep 534 



744 



INDEX. 



uncoloured 483 

unconform 484 

uncouth 409, 479, 5i7 555, 60 1 

unculled 630 

understood 394, 598, 612 

undying worm 524 

unenvied 401 

unessential Night 410 

unformed 537 

unfounded 422 

unfumed 490 

unhide-bound 605 

unison 548 

unity 558 

universal Dame 579 

unkindly 442, 586 

unminded 598 

unnumbered 424, 544 

unobnoxious 518 

unoriginal 60 1 

unperceived 450 

unprevented 436 

unreal Deep 601 

unreined 530 

unremoved 474 

unreproved 464 

unsleeping 501 

unspoiled 628 

unsucceeded 506 

unsuspect 583 

untamed 408 

unweeting 598 

unwiser 468 

up or down 446 

upbraided 453 

upon her centre poised 497 

upright (stature of man) 546 

Ur6 45 
Urania 530 
urge 372 
urged home 523 
Uriel 449, 517, 567 
Urim 525, 526 
urn 542 

us dispossessed 535 
Uthers son 393 
utmost isles 390 
utter 524 

utter darkness (of Hell) 372, 430, 
500 



uttermost convex 540 
Uzziel 470 

vain empires 409 

Valdarno 379 

vales of Heaven 381 

Vallombrosa 379, 380 

valour 636 

van ( = vanguard) 412, 511 

vans ( = wings) 424 

vapour 405, 657 

various 510 

varnished... with 411 

vast abrupt 409 

Venus 480, 534, 542 

verdant Isles 562 

Vertumnus 573 

vexed 380, 598 

vicissitude 508, 541 

view 459 

viewless 444 

vigilance (=guards) 465 

violent and void 454 

virgin 572 

virtue 381, 447, 457, 491, 524, 

538, 599 6 3<5 
virtue-proof 491 
virtuous 583 

visible diurnal sphere 531 
vision 624, 644 
vision beatific 395, 433, 500 
visitation 623 
visual ray 449 
vital virtue 538 
void 430, 454 
void of pain 405 
void profound 410 
volant touch 632 
vollied 472 
voliibil 466 
voluble 574 
voluminous 419 
vouched 478 

wafted 444 

wafting 653 

wakeful bird 432 

wander (trans, vb) 458, 637 

wandering fire 481, 580 

want 534 



INDEX. 



745 



wanton 462 

wants not 407 

war unproclaimed 621 

warping 382 

was flown 546 

was run 516 

waste 421 

waste wide 595 

wasteful 426, 537 

watch (vb) 534 

watch ( = watchmen) 403 

waved 543 

weary (vb) 623 

wedge 544 

went 556 

were long to tell 389 

wert 430 

what ( = whatsoever) 484 

what is more 555 

what obeys reason is free 573 

what rests? 590 

what time 371 

whatever 472 

wheel of day and night 553 

when on a day 497 

whenas 571 

whip of scorpions 421 

white (friars) 443 

who first, who last 382 

wide (of the mark) 551 

wide Ethiopian 417 

wide interrupt 434 

wide... wasteful 426 



wide-encroaching 604 

wild (of the mark) 585 

wild Desert 647 

wilderness 572 

wing (n.) 430, 530, 567 

wing (trans, vb) 544 

winnow 485 

with a vengeance 457 

with gust 603 

within the wind 514 

without (= outside) 6n 

witness (vb) 371, 389, 483, 548 

won (= dwell) 545 

won audience 582 

won from the... infinite 430 

wont 398, 511 

wooed... won 559 

Word 435, 439, 506 

worm 545, 587 

wrack 474 

wreak... his loss 452 

Xerxes 597 

ye (=you, obj.) 463, 582 
yeanling 440 
your fill 496 

zenith 598 
Zephon 470 
Zephyr 609 
zodiac 622 
Zophiel 521 



II. GENERAL INDEX TO NOTES 
AND APPENDIX. 



absolute construction, instances of, 
374. 39i 432, 433, 438, 4^6, 
484, 535, 557 

abstract words used in a concrete 
sense 378, 433, 465, 470, 504, 
512, 533, 536, 550, 574, 613, 
623, 645, 650 

Abyssinian princes, tradition 
about, 461 

accent, throwing back of, in dis- 
syllabic adjectives 405 

accentuation, Latin, 466, 612, 617 

Addison, remarks of, on Paradise 
Lost, 408, 409, 434, 440, 453, 
475, 477, 484, 488, 492, 508, 
5^2, 523, 5^4, 552, 563, 583. 
594, 597, 658, 686, 690 

adjectival use of names 442 

adjectives used as nouns 402, 407, 
432, 579 615 

adverb used as a verb 571 

alchemists, allusion to, 447, 448, 

493 

allegory of Sin and Death 418, 

420, 547, 594 
alliteration, instances of, 410, 418, 

426, 433, 537, 540, 545, 569, 

580, 583, 585, 595, 602, 603 
Ammon, legend of, 685, 686 
anacoluthon 373, 404 
Angels, representation of, 398, 

399, 68 1, 682 ; changes in the 

fallen angels 515, 570 



apostate angels and gods of heathen- 
ism, identification of, 382, 516, 
604 

architecture of the Renaissance 

395, 396 

Arianism 439, 499, 558 

Ariosto, his description of the 
Limbo of Vanity, 441 ; other 
references to 370, 380, 415, 
520, 604, 634, 635, 677, ^78 

Aristotle's theory of ether, refer- 
ence to, 451 

Arthurian legend 392, 393, 565 

Aspramont 077 

assonance 398, 423, 452, 537, 602, 
603 

astrological terms 599, 606, 691, 
692 

astronomy, its great attraction for 
Milton, 549 

autumnal leaves, a multitude com- 
pared to, 379 

Babel, Tower of, reference to, 642, 

643 
baptism, Milton's view as to, 

653. 

barbarians, their invasions of the 
south, 382 

Barrow, Samuel, author of com- 
mendatory verses on Paradise 
Lost, 365 

bathos 491 



INDEX. 



747 



battle-scenes modelled on Homer 

510, 516, 524 

bees, common belief as to, 546 
Bentley, two of his emendations 

usually adopted, 541, 545 
bird of Paradise 366 
birds, migration of, 544 
blank verse, on the use of, 367 
blindness, Milton's description of 

his, 682, 683 
Bunyan's Holy War, compared 

with Paradise Lost, 401, 520 
Burke, quotes Milton, 415, 453, 

454, 461, 580, 596 

Cselum Stellatum 443, 446 
cannon invented in Hell 520 
celibacy of priests, allusion to, 

469 
ceremonies and ritual in worship, 

Milton's dislike of, 382, 468, 

655 

Chaos, palace of, 425, 426 
Charles II., court of, probable 

allusions to, 389, 469, 638 
Chinese carriages with sails 440, 

44 i 
Church, attacks on the, 457, 480, 

651, 654 
Civil War, probable reminiscences 

of, 411, 471, 520 
classical epics, summary of the 

themes of, 563, 564 
classical mythology referred to as 

fables or dreams 375, 533 
climate, supposed influence of cold, 

566, 567 
Collins and Milton 455, 462, 487, 

525, 625, 633 
colloquialism 492, 610 
comets, superstition as to, 421 
comparative and superlative con- 
structions, combination of, 462 
Copernican system 465, 466, 549 ff. 
cosmology of Paradise Lost 659- 

66 
crucifixion 652 

Damasco 678 

Dante illustrations 370, 371, 372, 



373, 393. 397, 4*5, 416, 425* 
428, 430, 432, 433, 435, 441, 
447, 450, 452, 453, 455, 45 6 , 
458, 464, 494, 495, 49 6 497> 
499, 504, 506, 509, 512, 517, 
5^8. 53, 532, 542, 544, 553 
555. 560, 576, 577, 602, 607, 
612, 618, 637, 639, 642, 643, 
654, 666, 669, 680, 687 

Dead Sea 385; fruit 603 

deities of heathenism and the 
apostate angels, identification of, 
382, 516, 604, 672-74 

descriptions, where intentionally 
vague, 420, 474 

deterioration in the physical uni- 
verse 606 

dis- (negative prefix), compounds 
with, frequent use of, 641 

Drummond of Hawthornden and 
Milton 481 ; illustrations from 
423, 428, 439, 491, 530, 550, 
553, 554 576, 606, 631, 687 

Dryden and Milton 366, 367, 376, 
471, 548, 601, 632, 683, 690 

-ean, Milton's scansion of the 

termination, 608 
early rising 571, 576 
earthquakes, notion concerning 

the cause of, 376, 512 
East Indiamen 417 
eclipses supposed to be of evil 

omen 393, 620 
Eden, position of, 457, 458 
Egyptian mythology 388 
emphasis, Milton's favourite form 

of, 405, 436, 507 

epanadiplosis, see verbal repetition 
episodical description 496, 497 
ether, definition of, 451 
Euripides, resemblances to, 372, 

478, 613 

fire, supposed origin of, on Earth, 

614 
flight, Milton's favourite metaphor 

of, 369, 430, 530, 567 
Florence, see Italy 
Fontarabbia 679, 680 



748 



INDEX. 



freedom associated with reason 
434 49 6 > 573. 643 

gardens, Milton's love of, 576 
Geoffrey of Monmouth 392 
geography, illustration ot Milton's 

accuracy in, 683, 684 
golden apples of the Hesperides 

446, 459, 562 

golden chain, Homer's, 428 
Gray, imitations of Milton, 371, 
39' 393. 397. 402, 416, 426, 
466, 492, 523, 571, 589, 630, 683 
Greek and Latin idioms 373, 374, 
381, 391, 397, 409, 430, 431, 
445, 446, 455, 462, 475, 501, 
5i6, 535. 546, 558, 583, 618 
Grotius' Adamus Exul 377, 549, 

583, 610 
Guardian Angels 427 

heavenly bodies, views as to their 
being inhabited 442, 548, 553, 

569 

Hebrew poetry, Milton's prefer- 
ence of, 431 

Hell, Milton's picture of, 402, 
414-16 

hendiadys 598 

"heroic," Milton's description of, 
Paradise Lost, 690, 691 

Hierarchies of Heavenly beings 
680-82 

high-priesthood, allusion to the 
struggle for the, 650, 651 

humours in old physiology 637 

hypallage 444 

hypocrisy 450 

Imaus, see geography 
impersonal construction 490, 516, 

594 
imputed righteousness, doctrine 

of, 437 
inversion of order of words 376, 

39 6 > 397. 432, 476, 5i3 53' 

537 556, 574, 587. 59 2 > 6l 9> 

648 

inversion of rhythm 587 
irony, examples of, 522, 527, 546 



Italy, Milton's stay in, 378, 379, 

380, 445 

-ive, passive use of, in adjectives 
60 1 

jingles, see word-play 
Johnson, comments on Milton, 
398, 408, 431, 460, 461, 479, 

5i5. 5i7 53L 532, 565. 566, 
597, 621, 624, 691 

Latinisms 391, 397, 402, 410,426, 
436, 445, 468, 484, 509, 511, 
518, 546, 558, 598 
Lauder, William, attacks on Mil- 
ton, 365, 377, 378, 610 
legal metaphors 436, 605 
liberty, Milton and, 406, 638, 643 
Licenser for the Press 393 
light, passages on, 429, 430, 538, 

539 
lute, in Milton's time, 480 

Marlowe and Milton 377, 501, 

502, 663 
Marvell and Milton 365, 366, 

381, 413, 447, 460, 477, 532, 
632, 657 

matter and spint, connection be- 
tween, 492 

meiosis 409, 431, 482 
middle air, theory of, 674-76 
Milton, his sight, 430, 531, 629, 
682, 683; person 461; hair 
461; fondness of twilight 466 ; 
favourite classical authors 478, 
577 ; humour 522 ; favourite 
season for composing 567; early 
rising 571, 576; London home 
in youth 575; austere life 631, 
632 ; health 632 
monachism, allusion to, 469 
monarchy, Milton's dislike of, 641 
monosyllables, frequent use of, 

416, 546 

Montalban 677, 678 
moon, supposed to be affected by 
magic 420 ; whether inhabited 
44 2 553> 554 5 theory as to spots 
of, 492 



INDEX. 



749 



Muse, invocation of the, 368, 529 
music, Milton's love of, 391 
music of the spheres 482, 500 
musical terms, accurate use of, 
548, 557. 633 

Nature, Milton's love of, 466, 576 
night, Milton inspired at, 431, 564 
nightingale, Milton's fondness of, 

477 

north regarded as the dominion 
of evil spirits 502, 503, 510 

omens or portents 559, 583, 620 
opposition of planets 514 
organ, Milton's favourite instru- 
ment 395, 632 
original sin 586 

oxymoron 372, 395, 406, 439, 462, 
5*4, 58* 

pagan mythology and Hebrew 

story, combination of, 402 
pain, the fallen angels liable to, 

515 

Paradise, position of, 454, 455, 638 
paronomasia, see word-play 
participles, abbreviation of, 560 
personal and contemporary allu- 
sions 503, 507, 508, 509, 512, 

529, 53 1 , 53 2 , 5 6 4> 583* 589, 

613, 621, 632, 635, 636, 638, 

641, 655 
personification, instances of, 474, 

514. 526 
philosophical and theological views 

494 

Phcenix, legend of, 485, 486 
planets, evil influence of, 514, 599 
play on words, see word-play 
Pope, imitations of or resemblances 
to Milton, 371, 372, 385, 395, 
399, 401, 426, 427, 442, 453, 
4 66, 470. 474, 476, 477, 4 8 7> 
495, 5i5, 5^8, 529. 538, 542, 
544, 617, 618, 621, 622, 624, 
629, 58 4 

portents, see omens 
precious stones, supposed origin 
of, 44 8 



predestination, doctrine of, 435, 

496 

preposition, omission of, 410, 637 
Primum Mobile 440, 443, 445, 

446, 553 
proper names, enumeration of, 625, 

676-80 

proverbialisms 559, 591, 61 1 
Ptolemaic system 443, 465, 466, 

549ff., 688-90 

quibbles, see word-play 

reason, discursive or intuitive, 

495, 496 

republicanism 490, 546, 641 
rivers of Hell 414 
Roman Catholic Church, Milton's 

attitude towards, 399, 441, 443, 

444, 597, 59 8 

Sandys' Travels^ Milton's obliga- 
tions to, 383, 384, 646 
Satan and Prometheus 473 
Satan, character of Milton's, 667- 

7i 

scale of Nature, Milton's view of, 
494-96 

season, only one before the Fall, 
459, 542, 607 

sh-, avoidance of, m proper names 
369, 383, 445 

Shakespeare, Milton's imitations 
of or resemblances to, 375, 377, 
399, 404, 412, 427, 437, 463, 
474, 477, 483, 493, 505, 5i4, 
526, 543, 550, 559' 572, 576, 
578, 581, 59 1 ' 6 5> 619, 623, 
631, 636, 644, 658 

sibilation 398, 546, 580, 602 

Signatures, doctrine of, 629 

signs, see omens 

similes, peculiar features of Mil- 
ton's, 411, 417, 440, 471 

singular verb used with two sub- 
jects 374, 402 

soliloquies, use of, in epic poetry, 

5H 

Spenser parallels 373, 378, 402, 
418, 420, 422, 426, 439, 454, 



750 



INDEX. 



476, 493, 497, 498, 499> 53, 

504, 509 5i5 5^0, 522, 554, 

5 6l 5 6 5. 574> 575, 586, 587, 

635, 661, 666, 680, 681, 686, 
687 

spiritual beings, their ability to 

distend or contract 386, 398, 

473, S 2 * 

Stoics, reference to, 377, 413, 414 
Sylvester's Du Bartas, illustra- 
tions from, 567, 600, 614, 643, 
646, 647, 657, 676, 687 

Tasso, references to, 367, 379, 
'415, 420, 421, 465, 48.5, 528, 
537, 625, 628, 657, 686 

temperate life, praises of a, 631, 
632 

Tennyson, comments on or re- 
semblances to Paradise Lost, 

384, 393, 395, 396, 417, 4^3, 
424, 462, 467, 471, 484, 486, 
49 1 , 504, 515, 5i8, 521, 526, 
537, 54'. 546, 559 57<5, 617, 
631, 632, 634, 685, 688 

theological views 494 

Thomson (Seasons) and Milton 
3 6 7, 378, 430, 476, 480, 483, 
485, 536, 543, 56, 589, 633, 
637, 684, 686 

Time as the measure of motion 



transformed serpents 577, 602 
Trebizond, fame of, in Middle 

Ages, 678, 679 
tyranny, Milton's hatred of, 401, 

463 

Universe, change in, after the Fall, 

606 
Urania, Milton's name for the 

Heavenly Muse, 686-88 

Vallombrosa 379, 380, 455 
verb used as noun 494, 571 
verbal repetition 466, 489, 531, 

615 
verbs of saying, omission of, 475, 

478 
visions, belief as to, 644, 656 

woman's position and relation to 
^ man, Milton's conception of, 
461, 493, 560, 573, 584, 589, 
6r3, 635 

word-play, quibbles, jingles, &c. 
386, 394, 435, 463, 464, 488, 
506, 512, 522, 523, 558, 563, 
572, 581, 586, 592, 612, 614, 
623, 635, 643, 652 

Wordsworth and Milton 478, 
487, 499' 507, 515, 53i 532, 
554, 561, 581, 620, 688 



497> 
Tobit, 



>ok of, 456, 484, 493, zeugma 389, 556, 574 



517, 533 



CAMBRIDGE : PRINTED BY JOHN CLAY, M.A. AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS. 